Unknown 0:01
Okay, I would like to emphasize the importance of AGI as a foundational discipline, not to science. And I know that might be seen as a little bit provocative. In many respects, I agree your suggestion. For instance, they need to break free from the methodology of computer science, in some sense is either engineering or applied mathematics. And our rules are different. But we do need to borrow the tools of computer science for some particularly good reasons. I would like to talk about how we got here, in the situation that you have to do AGI as a new discipline outside of the discipline that originally designed to start with the mind, namely, psychology, and cognitive science. And why we should be doing computational models by going to this reading in psychology, why don't do it, there's a euroscience inviting to do this with traditional AI, where you add new letters to the old acronyms. It's like, well, you stuck it out, in my perspective, pretty miserable papers. psychophysics. The idea of having a science of the mind is not a cultural science or descriptive science, but then tries to find flaws in the language of the day, in your kitchens mental on the scientists who work for the Humanities, that meant that is designed to provide to people with education, rules that describe dependencies, today would say systems and so on, and make them accessible to measurements and empirical studies and to conceptual analysis on the level that goes beyond descriptive, or especially subjective description, but no notable descriptions you guys can see down there, because what is hammer from downloads, he did, for instance, studies in the spread of activation in nerves, how much distance could be covered in referral nerves and so on. He's also studied aspects of what we would call today condition. The guy in the middle of this is not Freud, it's still him would he is basically the father of experimental psychology and set up a lab in Leipzig in the 1800s. And did relatively proper experiments, and also theories on what he was actually looking at theories on emotion and so on, was that Becker is also considered to be one of the fathers of them. Physics, coming from physics at Stanford, for instance, early on resolution that we have in terms of stimuli. And what we discovered was known as tightness lock law. And I'm looking at number 60, which basically says that the subject strength of the sensation is related to the logarithm of the strength of the stimulus. So this was pretty early, but this guy has to work and psycho analysis existed more or less in parallel was at the same time, and Freud came up with very ingenious descriptive models of the mind, what was taking you there are common sense, not predictive, that you can receive them or falsify them, that give you handles from the scriptures, but they are not accessible measurement. This has some benefits, but it also has the drawback that for instance, if the psychoanalyst has a diagnosis of you that you have no way to disprove this diagnosis ever, it's always right. Is this debate defined? And in the early 20th century, there was this movement of positivism in science, which is that the value of a theory is basically the prediction medicine that can potentially be falsified. This is clearly not scientific, and you should try to get psychology into a scientific domain. And in order to get the I said, Okay, what things can we measure, we can make predictions. Now this is observing the behavior and the way it relates to stimuli and looking at things that are hiding hyper stimuli. It's not something that you should be doing if we are to be taken seriously in cycles, and the resulting movement called the universe and at first it was methodological point of view. Then we had ontological University, which was was promoted by Skinner who said there is basically nothing but operant conditioning is nothing but a black box that does react to stimuli and associates

Unknown 4:34
them with behavior. From our modern point of view, I don't think this is a very dangerous perspective. It was very productive. You could do an experiment and get lots of results, but it's limited is we can show them without hidden layers. We can certainly work there are certain product classes, and we do need in there to continue something that is akin to mention the presentation. So in a very strong ontological universe. could easily be disproved. But the next generation of psychologists was no longer ontological behaviorist by the most pragmatic University. Okay, maybe there is more to psychology or to the mind than observable behavior. Maybe it's things like thoughts and emotions and so on to exist, but it's not scientifically popular. And this is a very dangerous perspective, because it means that you do exclude certain things. consent, exclusivity is difficult and theories around them. So, from this perspective, psychology moved into a direction where it became very difficult to look at areas like problem solving, and so on. And psychology for the most part, even when it's relatively recovered from you, who is still suffering from its legacy, it's still a kind of defensive position against behaviorism, it has little focus on the non behavioral aspects of tradition, and hence, more or less narrow experimental paradigms. That is, you are encouraged to formulate hypotheses and then come up with an experiment that is or disapproves of food stamp offices, for a number of subjects in certain settings. If you look at American cognitive architectures, electron enters its papers, it's typically that he cheats this way, you can publish by having an introduction that tries to give some references to ideas, theoretical ideas that he has, then he comes up with an experiment with a proper standard and touchings data and so on. And then in conclusion, he tries to hide elements of his largest seniority. But the paper they just give companies a theory because many free variables and tries to integrate, but you will know about technology, also from settings outside of the app, because they're too complex to fit into, like the settings that you would find on the roster. Yes, we model a model, it is very hard to publish in psychology, you don't get any score for that fixity. So psychology, in some sense, is very antagonistic to formulate theories, theory and how the mind works as a whole. They are very data nodes and systematic systemic theories on how the market works. And then again, because they've also said against this exclusive focus on human performance, or maybe animal performance, it's not really a study of the mind, per se, of the class of systems, that would be considering safety and, or unconscious, or emotional, or reasoning, and so on. So in a way, we had to reinvent this. And one way of reinventing this was artificial intelligence, which treated the mind as an information processing system. That is a system that is a set of computational critical mind semester Turing machines, it's not a Turing machine. We'll be talking about this in modern thinking, perception, division, and normativity, and so on can all be explained in terms of information processing, there's the idea that we have AI, and you can test our ideas of how the mind works, not just as a single experiment, you don't have to confine this to one or two free variables. But you can ask difficult questions by asking theories in such a way that you can answer them as construction approaches, you can build theories that you can implement on the computer that you can run a test to potentially produce the desired performance. If you look at the name, artificial intelligence, it has a pretty long legacy, which probably started with logic and automatic theory and the idea of computability that we can increase computers have information to return to Europe and so on, and programming languages, event demographics, and support systems. And later on, came to implement neural networks, and autonomously to agents. So this is basically a long trajectory of stuff that contributed to our current understanding that also is being found in AGI today, if you look at the start of AI, was probably the top most conference that we get people like, especially Marvin Minsky, in your watch history, who invented the first assembler and also did the first Metro implementations ever. John McCarthy, who is responsible for this, among many other things, while channeling the father of modern information theory.

Unknown 9:26
And this darkness conference, we're in yet another conference literally coined the name of this this is an artificial intelligence for better or worse, McCarthy. Yep. Yeah. Yeah, you're right. Sorry. Okay. So in a way, I think that our AI approach micro markets to extending the natural opportunity taker guarantee, among many other things, sketches the idea of the Turing test, which is to be a test for Artificial Intelligence arguably, and also answers many of the objections to AI and nifty brought forth next 50 or 60 years, and gives very often reasonably good answers to those objections. So this is the paper that we make all our students read. In the beginning, in the 1950s, and 1960s, a lot of low hanging fruits were removed in a very, very short amount of time, we had the first planning systems and scheduling systems first simple natural language parsers. And reading systems and all this made it super optimistic to believe that this progress would continue at that pace, and very soon will be at human level intelligence systems that would solve that problem. 1969 Marvin Minsky accidentally killed connectionism it had to be reinvented 1970s and 80s. For the rise of expert systems that were slightly overhyped and crashed and are still alive, for instance, before WhatsApp. Then connections must be noted in AI, which, among other things, I focus very much on robotics and dynamical systems and so many days with the bathwater. And then the agent paradigms, which emerged in the 90s. And currently we have this battle of statistical and probabilistic modeling versus computer systems. But most of the I currently test applications and applied informatics and there is a particular reason for that. In 1900 73, there was a thick department editor and this department, Pitt, fundamental Richie Rich Gregory and look at vegans, and they wanted to do funding and big funding initiative and apply to the Royal Academy for scientists and get them this funding and the Royal Academy of Central's decided to have someone completely independent. Look at it, this is a completely independent kind of surgery. It's like no, basically, atmosphere scientist was also a mathematician and interested in many areas of research. And he was threatened to be a complete outsider. And so we could give a reasonable estimate whether this was a good field to invest in for the Royal Academy and the event in Edinburgh, totally hated on Ritchie. And as a result, he wrote a very damning report, it was first published or not republished, it was not intended for publication with what was leaked. And then it was published an excerpt in the paper favorites, artificial intelligence, a gentleman survey. And label basically said that there are three domains of AI, one a is basically automation to the robots, and the application is a reasonable thing to do. Then you have C, which is basically model competent systems based on what we find in biology, very closely aligned research to nervous systems and so on what individual neurons hands on, obviously, this is what we want to do to was very reasonable, but then there has to be some kind of a bridge, this has been in between business and output got to understand opposition, and this doesn't work at all. And you shouldn't be doing this. And then michy ethnic party and other small companies and you know, it's not really about robots, it's about building computations, theories of thinking and the mind that nobody will. And that will report basically killed funding for AI upscaling you a the UK and it's a very detrimental effect on funding for me I dreaded word growth and initiating moving steadily this channel known

Unknown 13:47
as the victor of AI. So at that point, the I basically became hesitant of following this big goal of understanding the mind to

Unknown 13:59
human level intelligence and beyond in terms of its applications. Okay, so President when he gets one of those big guys, by that time already had coined the phrase cognitive science of the name cognitive science and went to the department where she was a physicist too. And there was the idea to have a science that is drawing from all the other sciences of cognition, and combine this into a common paradigm with computational models, of course, and integrate is now popped up again in the context of technology. You will attend, we've just done the general problems or now turn towards soar and came up with the first generation of cognitive architectures. To this generation. I would also argue epic and the number of others in this one small movement makes mostly little psychology, but it's positive architectures and never really become mainstream and sound quality, I think. But the goal of this is unified theories of vision is of course, integrating all the sciences Stop your mind, from the perspective of the computer scientist, the people in cognitive modeling communities we invented not to be as the AI already invented. And so for many of the people in traditional AI departments that seem to be authentic, whereas for many people in the psychology department is basically not like psychology. Still, cognitive science as a new discipline was born with the hope to unite all the disciplines that contribute an understanding of the market is philosophy of mind, linguistics, neuroscience, and AI, of course, and the main premise of historic cognitive sciences is to understand mind as machine as an information processing system. Now, this motion of machine is controversial. Here, we have this combination my life and it's interval, 14, basically second measure that there is a machine. So to arrange us spring for thoughts, experience and perception and ready to blow this up, like dry mill and walk in there and see the mechanism, you're obviously parts that would be pushing and pulling and each other. And obviously, by pushing and pulling parts, you would never be having anything that could explain how perception and humans who are taking their condition could be explained. This notion of mighty machine for magnets was the clear indication that microblogging must be something beyond the mere mechanism beyond mere physics. And what do you have now is computational is in the position that the mind is a huge machine, but it's a computational machine, it's one that it's not about pushing parts together, but it's about processing information. And all these parts, whether they're moving or whether they are exchanging electricity, or whether they're doing anything else that is only incidental. It's only an implementation of the fact that the mind processes information. And this notion of computation is extremely powerful. It also encompasses things like quantum computing, and so on. But it's what's so important about it. It's the content of reform of the maintenance documents, the current form of economics. It's completely agnostic with respect to whether the world is made of metal of the world, it's made of ideas. In any case, we have to explain how minds can process information. And the science of that information processing is the central computation. So we can distinguish something that is one universal computation is this thing, which says the only thing that we can ever know about the university that installs information in our systemic boundaries, that is discernible differences. And to do that, if you find the polarity unit, it's sufficient that the reverse complements that it does provide us with level analogies and information that we have is a strong conflict of computation, which will basically say, whether or not we can say what universe but what the mind does, it's basically finding revenue at every level, it's an information processing information. So the mind is ontologically information processing system. And then if you don't believe that this is because the competition this position, your medical, while providing reviews is what it does every theory about the mind that that explains how the mind works, must necessarily be computational.

Unknown 18:14
The problem is computation isn't just that it's in South Asia, it's weakened as a result notice, but it couldn't have been formulated before the definitions that you got from the 70s. By Churchill theory, which is philosophy goes, it's pretty recent, and they largely have not calculated into philosophy of mind, and philosophy in general, and society in general, most people don't really understand what computation with us, including many people come to this original definitions of computation, we have things like records, which is basically a fancy way of doing Cut, Copy strings. And then we have intuition by control do you all want to approximate the Turing machines without you know that they will do the wrong intuitions, people have this idea that there are tapes and reels involved in doing all that is virtual and theoretical? If I teach students in philosophy post lambda calculus and the Turing machine, and they make them prove that they are clinical that ask them afterwards? Something like out of them, it says that the lambda calculus can do more than a Turing Machine afterwards, because it's doing things in parallel. So Turing machines to create wrong intuitions. And this is really a big problem because they find what integration comes in arguments against AI, cognitive science, and they many details of provision of computation in the wrong race because they don't properly react to random things or non reversible computation or the limited things that are easy to implement in a Turing machine that are not part of the original definition. The next step might of course not to machines perfect can do less than to make machines. Physical realizable to work machine is something that doesn't have an infinite tape and doesn't have infinitely many steps. But it's going on very finite state. And it's only going to run for a short amount of time compared to infinity. And it might be that all the theoretical paradigms to find computation are equivalent if we have unlimited resources, but they're not equivalent, once we start constraining them, if we have another calculus that only allows them to solve so many steps of resolution, and only saw too many characters in the streets, then there is not going to be in an exactly equivalent Turing machine that has something like the steps of computation and so on, or brain and stuff too many neurons, and so on too many cycles of information exchange. So the constraint systems of computation are not going to be equivalent. And it's not going to be helpful to think about in terms of actually computability, it's going to get you on the wrong track. Now, the good thing is that it really doesn't matter so much. Because in reality, when we do intentional modeling of positive modeling, or AI, you're not that much concerned with Turing machines. This is a debate and it's basically only important in discussions between philosophers of artificial intelligence. And I think that philosophy of artificial intelligence, sadly, is about as important right now to us, as this old metaphor is otology is two birds. Or, as I say, most of the evolution would be to molecular biologists. If I go to philosophy of AI conferences, I have this second question that I'm like a molecular biologist who sits in on meetings between evolutionists and creationists, it's definitely it's not very helpful. Okay, the problems of AI are really not about partnerships. They don't have a shared methodology right now, even among the AGI community. And it's difficult to convince AI to go back to its original goals, because they're afraid to steal funding for good reasons. And they're productive with the vagaries when they change things. yourself is very productive, but it's mainly descriptive. And if we don't have enough information processing, it's more or less on the level of nervous systems. So it's important for us, but it's not exactly what we want to do. Part of psychology is mostly a theoretical and experimental and philosophy right now with more tools for testing its theories, because it has not adapted our computational paradigm. So, right now, we are answering a question that the scientists have permission

Unknown 22:39
basically are not forming a cohesive law, but they are different scientists, they just happen to compete for the same funding. It seems that this funding race has been mostly won by computational neuroscience, or neuroscience or federal experimental neuroscience at that point, and your position that we need to shift this a little bit and AGI is an attempt in a way to reinvent AI, and then cognitive science as the science of the mind to grow constructivist theories of the mind. So what we need to do our challenges for AGI is to reintegrate the cognitive scientists on a constructionist Canada by implementing theories. So we can ask that, we need to focus on role models, not just isolated properties. And now I want to focus on all the components that we consider to be necessary to form the mind. And we need to do science instead of engineering. And I think it's a very important point. A very good heuristics would define an engineer from a scientist is the answer to the question, what do you think when you are done? What do you think what happens when you ask a scientist? What do you think when you are done? What do you say? I think realistics could have understood language. What do you think geography is done? When you think biology is done? I don't think that it's ever done. It's very rare. And thank you to pick up and say, Okay, now that we are done with close the downside to do something else in the other election, it's no longer productive. There's also other reasons why people prefer to start with non productive currently. But first sight is done as long as it is productive. And an engineer is somebody who makes an estimate on how long it will take him to finish a project. And you're not just finishing the project, you don't have a specification, yet you have a situation, that you have to come up with a specification first place and this is going to be part of our science. We don't have all the regularities and we don't know all of neuroscience and psychology that we need to integrate in this common role. And we have this impression that we have so many problems that we have certain methodology that's going to make a difference. And then might get into wishful thinking, which is a big battle believe that once you follow through without your project, you're done. And I don't think that you are you should go away from this. Now engineering paradigm in real life and to turn this into a science. That's what I wanted to say.
