Unknown 0:00
I'm really, really, really, really happy to have you here. Chiara. CHIARA maletto is a researcher at Physics Department of the University of Oxford. And she will speak to us today about construct a theory, or she calls it the science of can and can't, which is also the title of the book that is coming out, I think in next spring, if I'm correct. And I contacted Kiara after our previous four sets alone on quantum computing with Scott Aronson. And while I don't pretend to fully understand your theory, and I definitely won't attempt to try to describe it to you in the introduction, I'm really, really looking forward to your talk. I will put the description of both your talk and a little bit more intro about you in the chat here. And then I would say, we leave the questions for the discussions, people can just mark them with a cue. And I'll explain all of that again, in the chat. And yeah, I would say take it away, and I will moderate in the in the chat, everything that I won't take much take much more space in here. So but welcome. I'm really, really happy you made it, and I can't wait for the presentation. Yeah,

Unknown 1:05
thank you very much. This is a great opportunity. I enjoy this, the possibility of talking in this in this context is a great initiative. And so I will probably share my screen. And, you know, I'll try to, to talk you through the basics of this new theory. And of course, this is a very short introduction. So hopefully, you know, because this should be a very interactive session. I'm very happy to have more questions afterwards. So I'll keep it short. And then I'll open to questions. And I'm hoping to have a nice conversation with you guys. So the best way to understand I think construct, the theory is to start with something that's possibly well known, let's say at least, the name is now quite quite present in the news, which is quantum computation or quantum computing. And the way I like to start this kind of discussions is by by reminding ourselves what quantum computation really is. And I think, you know, if Scott was here, Scott aaronson was here, at some point in discussing about this, you probably got the gist of it quite quite nicely from him. But I guess what I want to say here is that the quantum, the theory of quantum computation is a very interesting place from the conceptual point of view, because it's a place where technology, so applications and things that can have an impact on the life of people in everyday life. Meet the foundations of physics. And this is very rare, because usually you have these very abstract theories of physics that seem quite distant from what we do in our everyday lives. And then we have, we have applications that can come out of those, for example, GPS coming out of general relativity. But this only happens after a long time, since the proposal the theory whereas in the case of quantum computing, I think the theoretical ideas were proposed in the 80s. And then it was immediately clear that this theory would, on the one hand, deliver lots of applications. So things like quantum cryptography and quantum algorithms can run on this universal quantum computer, but also would allow us to understand quantum theory, which is one of the most fundamental theories of physics we have at present, much better than then we did at the start. So I think there are some issues at the basics of the foundations of quantum theory, which are, which were still on to be uncovered in the 80s. And I think now we understand them much better thanks to quantum information. Now, the interesting thing about quantum computing is that while on one hand, there are lots of technological efforts going on at the moment to create this universal quantum computer, which will replace the objects that we currently use as our personal computers. But, but there is another interesting thing and this is the fact that conceptually, quantum computation in itself, you should look at it from the point of view of fundamental physics is an unfinished revolution. So, something is still to be done in order to complete this conceptual revolution was started in the 80s. And this has impacts both on on theoretical physics but also on Do the science and also on technology and construct the theory is connected to, to the way in which I imagine this revolution can be completed. So let's see why I say that quantum computation is an unfinished revolution. So when you open a book about quantum computing, I mean, might happen if you if you're not a specialist, it could be a bit of a, an exotic experience, but I think you can try. And what you'll see is a lot of equations that are based on the, the the dynamical equations of quantum theory. So the the things that Schrodinger and the rock and Einstein and people like that came up with

Unknown 5:49
at the start of the past century, are the very same equations, rules that are being used in order to power the theory of quantum computation. And this is a bit weird, because you would expect quantum computing being all about information and things that are more general than just a specific physical theory, you would expect it to be expressed in more general terms. And it's not just an expectation that the one has, you know, in an intuition is really, this is actually an expectation that comes from the fact that in physics, we physicists know that our theories, even our best theories, like quantum theory, nowadays, or general relativity, or Newton's laws, for example, in the past, are bound to be changed, because they are, let's say, the current best guesses to understand the universe, but they might be wrong. And they might have to be modified. So in fact, most physicists expect quantum theory to be changed at some point, in view of the fact that at present, it doesn't quite accommodate a very important phenomenon of our universe, which is gravity. And, of course, Einstein, that reminds us of the fact that gravity is well described within physics by a theory, which is general relativity. But that theory doesn't quite go together with with quantum theory, so so that's why we actually expect both theories to be changed. So from the point of view of quantum computing, this is a bit worrying, because if our understanding of quantum computing is really only based on quantum theories, dynamical laws, and if at some point these laws will be changed, so then the question is, is quantum computing still going to survive then? So one question through which we can try to go beyond quantum computing, as we know it that right now is, can we find a way of formulating quantum information theory or quantum computation theory in a way that doesn't rely fully on the operators of of this theory of physics, as we call quantum theory? So how do we go beyond the dynamical laws of quantum theory and still retain or improve actually, on our understanding of quantum computation? So first question. There's also another sense in which quantum computing is not is not the whole story is not the, you know, the, that there's something beyond the universal quantum computer. And this is the title of the slide. So it's the fact that despite the name, when you think of a universal computer, you're not referring to the most universal machine that one can conceive of. And here we need to have a little thought about this. So,

Unknown 8:55
a universal computer is a machine a computer that can perform all computations that are physically allowed computations. And this is something that Turing and then Deutsch and also other pioneers understood very well when they when they approach this concept within their own respective fields. But there are some tasks, some processes or transformations that the universal computer classical quantum cannot perform. So there are things that go beyond the capabilities of this machine. And the most important one, which is interesting for us for for various reasons, is the task of creating a replica of oneself. So when you think of let's say, the task of self reproducing a cell so you got the cell the self self reproducing, is creating a new instance of itself and you replica from Roma. yours. That task is actually seems very straightforward from the point of view of biology. But turns out that a machine like a universal computer, although it can be programmed to simulate that behavior within its workspace, it cannot itself create a new instance of of itself. So you know, imagine you could program your Mac or your PC, to assemble a new computer out of raw materials. That's not possible. It's just not something that a computer is designed to do. And yet, it's a physical process, it's possible, it's allowed by the laws of physics. So this tells us that there is a more universal machine than a universal computer. So that's why we need to, to upgrade, quantum computing to include these machines as well. And these machines are called universal constructors. So this is an idea that John von Neumann, polymath, great physicist and mathematician already understood in the in the 50s, even before the discovery of DNA, so this was quite cool. So he, he, he understood, completed the logic of self reproduction. And in that context, he defined this idea of a universal constructor, which is a machine that can be programmed to perform any task or any physical transformation that is physically allowed. So if you if you don't want to go into the details of this definition, you can just think of it as, as a as a universal 3d printer, in the sense that it's, it's an object that you you know, you load with a program describing what you want to build. And as long as that the thing you're writing in the program is allowed because of physics, whatever object you're considering. With the right program, this machine will assemble it for you, given enough raw materials, and we don't have a theory for this machine. So we know it, we can define it, you know, in principle, but we don't have a theory that explains to us what are the physical limitations of this machine, under what conditions these machines can be built, and so on. And that's the second sense in which the theory of quantum computing should be generalized because you would like to have a theory of quantum constructors of universal quantum constructors that are like the upgraded version of universal quantum computers. And why is this exciting? Well, it's exciting because we already know that universal quantum computer is bringing us very close to possibilities that we couldn't even imagine just with classical machines with classical computers. And the theory of the universal constructor, even though it could be very far in the future, could be bringing about

Unknown 12:57
the next technological revolution, which could be comparable to the IT revolution that we've had just now. So let me try to explain now the logic of how one could answer these two questions. So we got two questions. Questions are good in physics, because, in fact, in science, in general, or in even in philosophy, the questions are actually problems. And these problems are interesting, because they tell us that despite the success of quantum computing, there is a lot more to be done and to be understood further than that. And so one can think of ways of answering these two questions. So how do we generalize quantum information so that it becomes independent of quantum theory? And also it can include machines that are more general than then quantum computers? And the answer surprisingly, comes from well maybe not so surprising. It comes from taking a look at how physics formulates explanations. And I think so this is the second part of the of this short presentation where I'm telling you where the the gist of the answer to these questions comes from. So as I said, I think physics can can can be considered as a as a collection of of guesses about how the universe works in its most fundamental ways. And I think we really only had a handful of good guesses laws that work as rules that are good for making predictions, and also are not just rules for making predictions, but they provide satisfactory unproblematic explanations of of physical reality. And these laws are written here in part, so we've got Newton's laws, Maxwell's equations, and these are this is the classical part of physics. And then we have the recent theories, general relativity and quantum theory that as I said, were discovered at the start with the law century. And And so together all of these laws are the best guesses we've had so far as far as as far as the you know, guessing how objects move in space time is concerned. And there is one trade. So the all of these holes look very different, but there is one specific thing that they have in common and at the Mason. They're similar to one another. And it's the fact that they all rely on a specific way of formulating predictions, which is that the bit like in this little cartoon over here, they are based on dynamical laws. And dynamical law is like a description of the set of points in space or in space time that an object goes through, given some initial conditions. And I think, even though in this case, we're only looking at football being kicked inside the goal. And of course, you can use Newton's laws to describe the football. But you can also describe this through generativity and quantum theory, and you will get the same predictions at this scale. This laws are very general. So you can do this for this specific example. But you could do it for the whole universe. And in fact, the goal of fundamental physics formulated in this way is to really give just the trajectory of all particles that constitute the universe. And once you've given that, and the initial conditions, you've explained, well, let's say most things that are to be explained. So that's the kind of logic behind this way of looking at the world. However, there are other ways of, of expressing physics. And and I think you, you must know about these things, because they are everywhere in let's say, in, in the in thermodynamics, and in other branches of physics that we've all somehow met one way or another. And I've written here three examples of these other kinds of laws that I want to call physical principles.

Unknown 17:13
The these three examples are very famous in some sense. So maybe the first two are more or more known. So you see on the left, this conservation of energy, which says that, that the energy of an isolated system can't change. So if if energies changes somewhere in the universe, there must be somewhere else in the universe where the energy is changed in such a way that the first change is compensated. So you know, if it there is, there is a sense in which overall, the the total energy of the universe has to be conserved. And this also implies that you can't build a perpetual motion machine of the first kind, which is supposed to be I mean, this is an example of an impossible motion, the one that the thing I represented here on the left, and so so the conventional energy basically says that certain transformations are impossible. Specifically, it's impossible to build a perpetual motion machine of the first time. And the second law of thermodynamics, which is the one in the middle here, also says that sound transformations are impossible. So it says that that you can't turn, heat completely into useful work with no other side effects. If you could, then you could use, let's say, the thermal energy of the sea in order to power a boat and make it proceed through the waves. And of course, we know that can be done. And this is not just an accident, it can't be done because there's a law that says this can be done. And that's the second law. And the third law that I reported there, which is actually not a law about impossibility, but it's about possibility is the computability of nature, which says that a universal computer is possible. And there's a question mark there because we really don't know although the first so the first laws are well established. The third one is bit on on controversial or unsettled yet, but I think it's it's interesting that it's formulated in terms of a statement about what is what is possible then. So this is declaring that certain transformation can be done. And there for your amusement I report you know, I, I put this nice cartoon, which comes from an illustrated story about the first attempt to create a universal computer, which dates back to the Victorian era. And this is Charles Babbage, this guy over here. He was a scientist in the UK who devised this machine called the Analytical Engine, which the whole of it actually should have worked just like a computer does. So it would have been the first programmable computer available to humanity. And, and then here is Ada Lovelace who is, who was the his collaborator. And she was the first one to stand that this machine, this universal computer could actually be used not just to make not just to compute, to turn out numbers, but to do many more general things. And I think she was even thinking of using it to produce music, or poetry, and so on. So I think two of them really pioneered the idea of, of the computability of nature, the fact that the universal computer is possible, it's a shame that they couldn't be able to compute her lack of funding, you know, these problems are present now as then. But I think it's very remarkable that they did they had this, this intuition. So anyway, to go back to our to our point, the gees of this slide is that the principles that are in physics,

Unknown 21:21
such as these ones, are not about dynamics. So there are no dynamical laws, not like in the case of Newton's laws, but they are about so there are statements about possible impossible transformations. So they say some transformations can be done and others can't. And so here comes the intuition. So is it possible? In order to answer the questions that we started with about generalizing quantum computing? Is it possible to take inspiration from these kinds of laws, the principles about possible and impossible transformations that already exist in physics, and generalize them and formulate the whole of physics in terms of these statements? Is that going to give us as a byproduct, also, a generalization of the theory of computation. Sounds like a crazy idea, but that is what construct the theory is about. And the idea is not so crazy, if you look at it very carefully. So So here is how I introduced now construct the theories program. So this is a program for it's a long term program for for a scientific project that can be developed in the future. So the, the idea is that instead of defining physical laws, in terms of dynamics, so like, instead of using Schrodinger equation, or Newton's laws, or Einstein's equation, and so on, you take laws about that I express this as statements about tasks being possible, or impossible. And then shorter, generalizing these principles that I just mentioned. And then you try to derive dynamics and initial conditions, from the statements as emergent consequences with the principles. So you're somehow switching the standard way of looking at the standard way of formulating laws of physics, which is in terms of dynamics, and you're trying to put the statements about possible impossible transformations at the foundations, and then you derive the statements about dynamical laws as a consequence of those of those other segments. And this is, it's very interesting that if you do this, you also solve the problem about generalizing quantum computing, because what you get out of this procedure is automatically a generalization of quantum computing to general tasks. And this is actually what provides the theory of the universal constructor. So following the constructor, serious programming in this way, also delivers potential answer to the questions that I presented at the start. So let's see. To summarize, let's say what are the two roles the construct the theory is expected to play? And I think, my work and in David's work in this field and the work of our collaborators shows that these two this this is actually happening. So this is quite quite exciting, because it's something's happening right now. So on the one hand, you see that construct the theory is a candidate to expand on the theory of computation in the in the two ways that I said so? Because it doesn't rely on dynamical laws, but only use the statement To our possible impossible tasks, it automatically well doesn't rely on quantum theory. So it allows us to generalize the quantum theory of computation to a domain where quantum theory may not hold anymore. And we hope that this is going to be the basis for delivering the fear of the universal constructor. And ultimately, once you have a theory, the universal constructor, you will also be able to, to construct the universal constructor. So that's, that's, let's say, the very, very long term goal that we that we have with this theory. And at the same time, the interesting thing for the set from the physics point of view is that the theory constructor theory has this novel physical principles that that generalize existing principles that we have in physics, such as those that I mentioned to you earlier. And these nice principles of constructor theory have a very interesting feature. So they are, they are general, so they can apply to systems that don't necessarily obey the current dynamical laws that we know. And the chief

Unknown 26:16
physical system that comes to mind when you talk to a physicist about this issue is quantum gravity. So as I said earlier, gravity is this weird entity that is very well described by the theory of relativity. But unfortunately, it doesn't quite fit with quantum theory. So if you have an object, which is a hybrid object that involves both quantum effects and gravity, you can't use either of the theories, you can't use Einstein theory, and you can't use quantum theory. But you can use construct the theories principle. And this is very promising. And let's say this is a second way in which construct the theory can deliver to us very interesting results, because it allows us to go and probe areas where current current dynamical laws are not not directly applicable. And so to end on a positive note, this is a recent application of this, of this logic, which was very exciting to the physics community, you can explain how to test non classical effects in gravity by using only constructor theoretic principles. And this is very nice, because it's, I would say it's the first application will construct a theory that connects these general principles with experiment. And so I think on this on this note, I'll just end this short presentation. And I'm very happy to continue the discussion with you, when I kind of stopped the share. Thank you for listening.

Unknown 28:01
And thank you so much. Amazing. Okay, very understandable. Well done. on that. I already see, I guess, already five questions collected in the chat. So this is for me an invitation to everyone who would like to join the queue and ask a question, to just preface your question with a cue in the chat. And we'll start right off the bat with tad hawk. And I'll unmute you if you don't mind. Hi, and thank you. 10. Pads, you can also say a few words, just your background,

Unknown 28:40
if it's Sure. So my name is Ted hoga, a physicist by background and done some work on quantum computing algorithms. And I've been involved with foresight and molecular machines for for many years. So my my question, my question is you at the very beginning, you talked about the the conflict, so to speak, between quantum mechanics and general relativity and the need eventually, for a better, more, more more complete theory. But also physics has this notion what's called an effective theory that that quantum mechanics works perfectly well in sort of everyday scales. And Gravity's not so big and not so strong, and so on. So in terms of a theory of computation, isn't what we already have with quantum mechanics, sort of everyday earth based computing likely to be perfectly sufficient in terms of what a computer that we could build on earth could ever do.

Unknown 29:32
Yes, so this is an interesting question that so that points so I think it's got two answers. One is, is more foundational, and the other one is maybe more on the practical side. So I prefer the foundational ones. So I have fun ones. Yeah. Yes. So in a sense, you're right that that one could could have a pragmatic take on things and say, Well, as you said, if you know if quantum theory is effective at least at the scales where we are expecting to be able to build computing machines, then then why worrying about about other effects and incorporating more general theories and so on. So I think that the, the foundation answer to this is that when you're thinking of as a purist to a theory of information, and you look at the, at the classical theory of information that, let's say, on which Shannon and other things are in Shannon's theory, and and the classical theory of computation, or based, you see that the dynamical laws of classical physics feature very little. And it's the theorems and the statements are made in very general terms. So it's they're made in terms of distinguishable states and permutations of those states. And then there are some results about channel capacity and so on. But when you switch to quantum computing, on the other hand, as I said, when you open a book about quantum computing, it's really quantum theory, dressed in in some computer science language. And being a physicist, I'm very happy about that, you know, I like that. But on the other hand, if I look at this, from the information theoretic point of view, it would be much better to have a theory that's only expressed in terms of information theoretic concepts. So for example, when you talk about entanglement, or when you talk about the quantum advantage that comes with a certain algorithm, it would be nice to be able to explain in, in what sense this call in just in terms of information theoretic concepts, why these things are different from the classical counterparts. And the only way in which you can do this at this stage, I think, is to just run certain dynamical processes with unitary transformations or CP mounts, or whatever. And then out of that you can distill some kind of comparison by it's very odd from the point of view of the foundations of information theory. And so this foundational answer will, it will be nice to have a unified way of treating classical and quantum information, this general framework. The other answer, which is more practical, is that there are very sensitive clocks that currently are being built, which allow you to detect effects like the gravitational redshift and related effects already with with very tiny masses. And so in a sense, quantum phases that could be used to perform quantum computations can be affected by gravity. And there have been a number of experiments even though, you know, still much has to be done. And so in a sense, I think I'm not so sure if it's so true that quantum computers can't be built at the scales where gravity is important. It's true that that you want pro gravity, where maybe gr is fully effective. But there is still a point where you have to reconcile reconcile the fact that you've got the mass in a superposition of different locations. It's heavy and even tiny mass. And then you got to think, what does the gravitational field do at that point? And, and as we, as we know, Einstein theory, suggests that the gravitational field is classical. So it cannot be in quantum superpositions. And so how do you how do you describe that? From even from the point of view of quantum computing, let's say you're using tiny atom to perform a quantum computation, that atom has a mass and he gravitates.

Unknown 33:48
So those are really interesting questions. Yeah. Thank you.

Unknown 33:51
Thanks for the question.

Unknown 33:54
All right, thank you. Okay, next one up. We have a list of question Alyssa on YouTube. Hey, can you hear me? Yeah. You could also say one or two words about your background is that Kara has, if you want to

Unknown 34:10
Sure. So my name is Luis events. I'm a senior core technology Engineer here at MCD. tech labs where we are building dialogue conversational AI for the McDonald's drive thru. So question, when you talked about limitations on classical computers, like a classical computers can't build copies of themselves? Are you referring to like engineering limitations that we have, like, you know, in the year 2020? Are you referring to like some sort of more general or more theoretical limitation? Because we have one kind of limit where we like, we know that computers will never be able to solve the halting problem, or there's a generalization called Rice's theorem where it's just like, you know, computers cannot do this ever. And then we have things like, oh, you know, it's the year in the year 2020. You know, Homo sapiens sapiens has not yet figured out how to do this, you know, but it may still be possible in the future, like you know, right now Oh, you know, you can't do more than like, you know, 10 to the 13 computations per second per chip or something like that. That's sort of an inherent limitation. That's just sort of like an engineering limit. So could you clarify what you meant by that? Yeah, this

Unknown 35:12
is a great question. I like it very much. Because I'm always well, in theoretical physics, you're very interested in the foundational limitations, so not the one that's due to the lack of in, you know, creativity, or lack of inventiveness or lack of money. But I think what we are interested in is really, whether there is a fundamental limitation that really can't be overcome, no matter how you, you know how hard you try, you can't do a certain thing. And in this case, I think for naught was really referring to this. Logical impossibility. So the so if you think of the architecture of a Turing machine, a Turing machine just has like its workspace, which is a tape. And so all the all the outputs that the Turing machine is supposed to, to produce are confined to that tape. So it's, it's logically impossible for the Turing machine to also construct the rest of the of itself. So it can only operate on this tape, by in order to create a copy of itself should be able to it should be able to operate on, you know, on the other part, it's not the tape, because it should be able to copy in some way, the full of its architecture into, let's say, a bunch of raw materials that are kind of floating about. And that cannot logically happen. It can, it can simulate the self, you know, reproduction of a cell, by suitable program, of course, cellular automata are all about that. But here's the question of whether it can create a copy of itself, given I mean, with the suitable instruction. And the phenomenal machine, or more general, the universal constructor has this feature chose. So it's it is it is a programming machine can that can perform any task that's physically possible. And so if you assume that that thing that that machine is possible itself, then it must be possible to create a new instance of the machine itself. So So I think that's why the unit so the universal constructor is really a new class represents a new class of machines that go beyond Turing machines, because they can operate on other things than just bits confined to tape. So So anyway, it's a fundamental limitation. And I liked your question very much. I think it's a great question. Yeah. Thank you. Thanks.

Unknown 37:44
All right. Thank you so much. Next one up, we have rally and rally I hope I'm not. I'm not catching you off guard who and I'm muting your NAU right now, golly, Pepsi could also say a word or two about your background, and then your question. Hello, hello.

Unknown 38:03
Cool. Hi. Yeah. Um, so my background is I'm interested in philosophy. And so I started my studies in philosophy and that just kind of like, because I don't know, know about this constructor theory, this new stuff for me, and I just kind of like, that comment caught my eye with the idea of nature being the computer business of nature. Yes. Oh, is that like, so? What? To what extent? Why is that to say that, you know, is that the question of, is nature fundamentally mathematical? Somehow? Or is this like an ontological question or more like an? I mean, it's a huge, like, ontological question in philosophy in a way. Yes. So, yeah. Is there some is that the strong sense in which you're suggesting that here now or

Unknown 38:54
Yes, I think I think this is a very nice question, because it touches on a subtle issue that sometimes causes some confusion as well in different fields. So, the So, when when the thing in quantum computing or at least in physics, we think of computations, what we mean is a is some kind of function or permutation or transformation more generally, have a bunch of input states in in a bunch of output states. And the, the, the additional thing that we want for this to be a computation Acting on information degrees of freedom is that the input states are all somehow distinguishable from one another. But what um, just to answer your question, I think the computability of Nature says something very specific. Once you have decided that this is your notion of computation. It says this, that if there exists a computer A machine that when given specific inputs can perform one type of computation, let's say addition. And if it physically, I'm now thinking when I say it exists, I mean, it exists, given the laws of physics that we know. And if there is another machine, if another machine is allowed, which let's say perform another computation, for example, multiplication, then there must exist also a more general machine that can perform either of those, given a suitable program. So you can think of a more general machine that when you say, I want these two numbers to be multiplied, perform my performance multiplication, and when you say I want them to be added, it will do it will perform addition, this means physically that you can compose these, you know, computing machines in very specific ways. And it it's it's an accident of the laws of physics that we now you can prove this through with the theorem within quantum theory and within a discretized version of Newton's laws, that they had this property, but it need not be. So there could be other models where where you know, you've got a look, you know, lots of lots of tiny computing machines that can perform specific tasks. But if you want a universal computer, one, like the one that we're using, now, you can't build one. So at some point, you can't compose together further, you know, all of these specificity, special purpose computing machines, so the computability of nature is kind of technical term, I suppose, that I was using to refer to this specific property. And now the then there are these other sort of material computable functions in mathematics and so on, which refers to a specific model of computation, which is Turing's model, and etc. And that's, that's a different thing. So I was trying to be more general, in the sense of this computability of nature can be really defined under any model, so long as you have, let's say, some dynamical laws that tell you what are the processes that are allowed?

Unknown 42:14
I hope that makes sense. Yes. Cool. Awesome. Thank you so much. Next one, we have Mike.

Unknown 42:25
Hi, this is my, my background is mechanical engineering, design, and also the computer it service. So I just want to comment, or part of it sounds like the problem of the origins of life in a way that, how would you we know how to create the primordial soup and chemicals, but we don't know how it actually starts as a self replicating life. So this constructor theory kind of reminds me of the same kind of situation, just an observation. But my question was, if you've looked at all category theory, and apply that to this constructor theory, as a way to deduce what principles and laws there might be, based on your observations.

Unknown 43:17
Yeah, this nice question, I think. So the category theory is this very powerful mathematical tool that, that somehow powerful generalizes set theory and kind of upgrades it in a dramatic way. And I think, although at the stage or the current stage, so construct a theory is formulated more in the context of set theory. But I think the some, you know, one of the students is working with me. He, he's interested in translating the current results of constructive theory within category theory, because that appears to be the most natural language. So I like your question, because it's very, is somewhat related to a current development in my own research with with this collaborator of mine. And I think it's, it's very important to express the theory in more effective mathematical ways, because, of course, once you do that, then you can see even more connections that you maybe wouldn't otherwise be able to see. And about the origin of life quest, I mean, comment, I think the so the, so the concept of a constructor is possibly I mean, I think it is related with to life in some sense, in the sense that I didn't go into these details, but I think what phenomenon called the constructor is could be generalized in in physics and in biology. With anything that can effect the transformation on a physical system, and stays unchanged in the ability in its ability to cause the this transformation again. So it's something that works in a cycle. And so obviously, cells and organisms had this property. But the sort of the interesting thing about constructive view is that we are trying to. So despite being called constructive theory, it's a bit like with relativity, the theory is not about constructors, constructors are the things that you abstract away from the description, because all the laws are about possible, impossible tasks. And ask is possible if you have if that can be a constructor that performs it. And it's impossible if there cannot be one. And so by by restricting your statements to whether a task is possible or impossible, you are avoiding the the issue of a numerating the constructors saying where they come from and and how they have to be constructed. So in a way, you you are abstracting away the issue of where do the constructors come from? But I think you're right that there is a strong connection with biology, at least at the, you know, conceptual level when you're talking about constructors. And for Neumann was motivated by biology when he made these remarks about the universal constructor because he was trying to understand how life fits into the laws of physics, which of course it does. But I think at the time, it wasn't quite clear, because we didn't know about DNA yet. And things like that. So. Yeah.

Unknown 46:51
Anyway, thanks. Yeah, it's just yeah, polymerase. And DNA looks so much like a Turing machine the way it operates.

Unknown 46:59
Yeah, yes, absolutely. Fair. Well, thanks a lot.

Unknown 47:04
Thank you. Lovely. Okay. Next one up, we have Logan.

Unknown 47:11
Hi, I'm Logan. I'm a science writer. Hello. So you said in your talk that you hope to maybe deduce the boundary conditions from these constructor theoretic principles. So I'm guessing that includes, let's say, the initial state of the universe, hopefully, but do you think construct a theory has anything to say about maybe the final state of the universe if people don't intervene between now and then for example?

Unknown 47:36
Yes, I think I think the so the program, so that part of the program hasn't been so we we haven't realized it yet. But I think the the expectation is exactly as you were saying to once you once you lay out all of these statements about possible and impossible transformations, you can find ways of showing which laws which dynamical laws and which initial conditions or boundary conditions are compatible with with those statements. So, in a sense, because of the well, one would expect that the dynamical laws that are compatible with the principles are of the form that we know already now. So for instance, general relativity and quantum theory should be compatible with constructive theories principle. And we know quantum theory is compatible in general activity, also, most likely is. So because those laws are time reversal, symmetric. What they mean, so that means that that they are the same whether, you know, when you're evolving them from past to future, they are the same as from future to past. Once you make statements about the initial conditions, the same statements should be possible to make about the final conditions. So because of the symmetry of the laws, I would expect that once you know, if you managed to say something about the initial conditions of the universe, you should be able to say something about the final conditions. So hopefully, yes. The answer is yes. To what you're asked. Of course, we have to do it. Yeah. Thanks so much for the question. Thank you.

Unknown 49:26
All right. We are making progress on the question. So if there's others that you want to collect there as we may get to them. So let's see next one up, we have Jesse Jesse Nichols. I will unmute you now. Hey,

Unknown 49:45
so I was wondering about the rationale or epistemology that this work comes from? I asked because I know the context of this organization is a bit on the more Bayesian side So I wonder how does this theory deal with Credences? Or probabilities?

Unknown 50:09
Yeah, that's a great question. The so, I think the, so, in a way this these questions are more at the metal level in so you know, to be like, the same question could be asked about current, like current dynamical laws, right. So quantum theory or Newton's laws and so on. And for all laws, including I think constructed theory, follows we know, right now, the deterministic structure comes first. So, if you think of all this, these laws that we have, so, there's Newton's laws, Maxwell's equations, quantum theory and general relativity, and in all those cases, you have a dynamical transformation, which is deterministic. So, you know, Newton's laws, you know, what the dynamical laws are, and then in quantum theory, training as equation is also deterministic in the sense that it evolves this quantum state deterministically, from one time to another, and so on. In quantum theory, there is a bit of a complication, because when you make a measurement on the quantum state, then there is a probabilistic outcome. But, if you describe everything, from the point of view of the whole universe, the if you believe that quantum theory applies at the level of the whole universe, which is what quantum theory seems to say, then the whole universe is evolving really deterministically. And the appearance of stochasticity is really only to do with the with the measurement events. So, overall, it's all deterministic. And likewise, I think you construct a theory, the fundamental statements are deterministic. So when we say a task is possible or impossible, there is no probability involved in that statement. However, you can accommodate or derive probability within those from from those statements. So you have like some axioms that are, don't involve probabilities. But you can derive derive the, you know, certain probabilistic statement out of those axioms, just like in quantum theory, and the So, so this is, as far as probability are concerned, for Credences. This is even more abstract because this is referred to, let's say, so, to a certain theory of confirmation of science of, let's say, theory, confirmation within scientific method. And I think constructor theory is agnostic about that, in a way. So so if you know, if you if you approach theory, confirmation from the Bayesian point of view, you will be able to apply to construct a theory as much as you can with with other physical theory that we theories that we have at the moment. And then, you know, I'm happy to discuss about Bayesian ism as well. I mean, my my inclination is that I tend to, I tend to think of things in a more coherent way. So So I think Bayesian is maybe it's not so necessary. But I don't think it would, you know, if you're a Bayesian, yeah, exactly. If you're a Bayesian, I think you can still, you know, take the whole construct a theory and make sense of it, just like you would with another physical theory. But, you know, if you ask him about my own bias, I think I tend to think that Bayesian ism is not completely adequate to explain theory confirmation. Sometimes it's a bit misleading. Okay. Hope that answers the question. Yeah. Cool. Awesome. Thank

Unknown 53:45
you so much. Next one up, we have Dennis and as

Unknown 53:49
you can you hear me? Yeah. Great. Hi, great talk. Nice to meet you. My name is Dennis. I'm a software engineer. And I'm interested in the mind, particularly within a pop Aryan and Deutschen epistemological framework. So I'm interested if you've learned anything from construct a theory about how the mind may work, or if that's if you've had any insight on that.

Unknown 54:20
So I think the the so the answer is yes, I think the well, so we haven't had an insight into that specific problem yet, but I think what I am hoping that in what I think David also is interested in is that the conceptual tools that construct the theory provides will allow you to tackle this problem in a radically different way and and set the stage is just a hope, but I think there are reasons to expect that. And the main reason is that when you discuss the mind, in a sense is an entity that creates to particular kinds of information, which you can think of as a resilient kind of information that also has causal power on the environment. And this is some something that you can call knowledge. Or that's the term that I think David. And I also use to refer to that. And this particular kind of information in constructed theory can be characterized in a very in an objective way. So you can talk about it as a copyable set of states with other specific information theoretic properties that I can then list if you like. But I think the important thing is that you can characterize what knowledge is in terms of possible tasks without ever referring to subjective, scale dependent approximate concepts. And this is nice, because usually, in the theories of how knowledge is created, you get a lot of these, well, sometimes some stochastic sort of approaches. Other times, you have some subjective ways of defining minds and things like that. And it's very hard to have an objective handle on these concepts. And that's problematic because for, well, for scientists like me, you know, it's important to have a way of objectively describing or handling concepts, even before ever creating a theory about them. So the hope is that once you have this concept available, you can then make a theory of the kinds of physical objects that can create knowledge, like, for example, minds, or even Well, I mean, the other thing that creates knowledge is natural selection, which creates it in a much less efficient way. But these are the only two things that we know of in the universe that can could create this kind of information. And so the theory doesn't exist yet. But I think the conceptual tools the constructor theory, provides will be very useful to develop on. And so there are also applications to I think AI and AGI. So, so And David is very interested in this kind of stuff. I'm also quite interested in, you know, because this is not my main focus, because I'm a physicist, I, I think this will, I'm hoping that someone in the field of of AGI will notice these kind of comments and concepts, and they will use them. And I mean, you already see that there are some people in that field who are trying to get away from the standard way of thinking about stochastic sorry about about learning and machine learning and things like that, you know, there's Judea Pearl, who has this nice theory about counterfactuals, which is trying to get away with standard concepts away from the standard concepts. So I think there is a need for these concepts, and hopefully constructors, you will provide some

Unknown 58:04
right on Thank you. Yeah. Hey, Kara, I'm realizing we're now one minute past the hour. i We have three more questions. I'm not sure how you're doing on time. I think

Unknown 58:16
I can take three more questions. Yeah, it's fine. Absolutely.

Unknown 58:19
Okay, lovely. I know those folks will be very happy. Okay, then, without further ado, Yasha. Your question is next. And I'm going to pose a low point for on those salons and here in the chat, for those of you who have to jump off and for those who, for whom it was the first time for joining. But for now we have Yasha. I

Joscha Bach 58:43
am an AGI researcher. I'm quite interested in David's and your theories. But I don't yet understand how constructor theory goes beyond constructive mathematics. That is, how can it compute things that finite state machine for instance, cannot compute, in principle, I don't think that recreating yourself is an issue with is a program that reproduces its own source code is basically it's called a quaint and it's a hobby that computer scientists have had successfully for quite some time. And as I didn't understand your metaphor of a 3d printer, for the constructor, in the sense, I do understand that you can take the constructor theory as a methodological approach that basically puts computer science in a slightly different hierarchy. But I don't see an ontological difference. And I don't understand the ontological statement that you and David are making when you say that you can compute things that other computers cannot.

Unknown 59:47
Right so the statement isn't, so I think that was part of the motivation and in a way it's phenomenon statement, and I'm just repeating what he said. So I'm more more or less parroting someone that was I was already I had to, you know, even biologists in a sense, I think the point that Fernando made, which is somewhat motivating the whole idea of a constructor, we should be a more gentle machine and curing machine is that if you take a Turing machine, yes, you can have programs inside the Turing machine that can self replicate or you can have while the Turing Machine simulating, in within with a specific program, the behavior of the cell that self reproducing, but there is no instruction, you can put in the Turing machine that would get the Turing machine to create a replica of itself out of elementary materials, simply because the Turing machine doesn't have that doesn't even have the, the tools to do that, in a sense, right. So you would need arms to like assembles the keyboard, you know, thinking of a of a modern Turing machine, you would need your computer to be augmented with a number of other well, working arms that are various tools that you will,

Unknown 1:01:15
this is about this abstract. Again, it's about a substrate. In other words, so of course, you if you are in virtual reality, you can create another virtual world that has the same property.

Unknown 1:01:27
Yes, there's no space in the Turing Machine model, the only thing that Turing machine can operate on is its state. And there's no way that the Turing machine can create on its state, a new instance of itself, it doesn't even work. So if you think of the Turing machine, physically, it just doesn't look. So it's not possible for this to occur.

Joscha Bach 1:01:50
But there is no space space is not computable, what we observe is a set of locations and trajectories that information can take, that is what physics is about. And the space is something that exists in the limit, when you look at too many of these locations to count and too many trajectories to count, then you get to a space. But you can see that as singularities in the space that are unavoidable. So space itself is not mathematically consistent, that can be space that works exactly like the space that you observe inside of a Turing machine.

Unknown 1:02:22
But I think I'm now thinking of the, of just the discretize model that can support the Turing machine. So I'm not thinking of some exotic physical theory, I'm just thinking of the discretized model of classical physics, that That within which you can define the model Turing machine. So the program that said, you know, the coin, this this problem that can self reproduce within the Turing machine, it's not really performing self reproduction in the way that cells do, because it's using the error correction mechanism that's already within the Turing machine. And it's using a lot of other bits of the environment in which is self reproducing, which don't exist, let's say in the in this thing, the biosphere when you're trying to look at what happens when cell self reproduces so so it's conceptually different from from the self reproduction that occurs in a cell. And I think phenomenon was interesting that on top of it phenomenon was really to just talk about the Turing machine as a whole. So it wasn't interested in a specific sub part of it, being able to the say replicate, it was interested in the question, I define the task, which is self reproduction, can the Turing Machine executed? And the answer is on itself. So like, I mean, there are different ways of self reproducing you can, you can either have an entity look at its various details, and then try to reassemble itself out of raw materials directly by inspection. But that's very prone to errors. And then of course, there's the phenomenon logic, which is the correct one for high accuracy, self reproduction, which is the you have like a description of the whole architecture, basically DNA, and then that thing gets copied bit by bit. And then the, the initial entity that sells revolution thing executes that program in order to create a new instance of itself. And the Turing machine doesn't have the space for these kinds of stuff. It just does not logically support this type of instruction. At best, it can do something on its tape. And that won't include creating a new Turing machine on its tape. It just that's not part of the Turing Machine architecture. I mean, phenomena has a nice article on this is dated 1950 or something and it's very nice. So you know, I can I can send it to you if you want. Yes, please. But yeah, it's not something that David and I claim, in a sense constructor theory is just taking the the motivation to go beyond quantum computing, to have a theory about these machines that can act on more general transformations that are not just computations. And this This is all what that reference to for Neumann was intended to achieve. I hope it didn't, it didn't kind of confuse too much.

Unknown 1:05:28
It didn't confuse but I'm not yet sure about the answer. But thank you very much for your effort. Yeah. Thanks. Thank you. All right,

Unknown 1:05:37
well, maybe we can find the paper and share it even in the chat.

Unknown 1:05:42
You might find it later.

Unknown 1:05:44
That's amazing. Thank you. Next up, we have Ted Howard. Ted all on mute you. Hi, Ted.

Unknown 1:05:51
Thanks. Awesome. Well, what is the role in constructing? Hi? What's the role in construction theory for fundamental uncertainty? I heard you. I was interested in Jesse's response, and Trotsky was Christian. They both aspects of what I'm pointing at, you seem to be coming from the idea that you can have something which is tightly constrained that can approximate causality. But what if the universe we live in is constructed from infinities? And if Garrett LISI has something in the idea that what we see as order is something that falls out of the symmetries through that are allowed and infinities when the symmetries are only like collective states, where things tend to modulate but actually, all infinities are allowed, or any instance of an infinity as a lab, then you're dealing with something that's fundamentally uncertain. And the order that we have is an approximation. So it's, we're back to uncertainties, does construct a theory allow for that sort of approach? Or is it where the constructors are themselves fundamentally uncertain?

Unknown 1:07:11
Yes, I think the solid Well, the way we shall certainly can come into physics. So that several ways so one, one is the one you mentioned. The other one is, of course, through quantum theory. And I think the so the key here is that, let's take you know, a theory with infinity. For example, you know, quantum field theory or field theory in classical physics, has lots of infinities there, but you can still define, within that theory, a set of possible transformations. And so, so that doesn't mean that all the states of that theory, when transforming to one another, are free of uncertainty or free of infinities are free of whatever else. But you can distill a subset of the properties of physical systems that obey that theory for which the statement a certain task is possible, is valid and meaningful and consistent. So I think we've constructed who is aiming to provide constraints on physical theories, so that they must be expressible, at least in part, through these statements about possible and impossible tasks. If they cannot be expressed in terms of possible impossible tasks, then they don't they construct the theory. So they will be somewhat ruled out from the constructor theoretic picture of the world. It could be a constructive theory is wrong, and those other theories are correct. And in which case, you know, that's, that's, it would be nice to find an experiment that could tell those two things apart. But I wouldn't, you know, in the specific case, you were referring to I will know what experiment wants to think of, but what I'm trying to say is that we are still within, you know, the classical physics dialogue, in a way because constructor theory is just proposing a certain understanding or explanation of the world. And it could be that it's just wrong. In that case, in which case, you know, it's, you know, we should switch to something else at some point. But we are not yet you can make a prediction and test it against something else.

Unknown 1:09:29
It seems to me that human brains are heavily biased by the fact that evolution most heavily selects for things that respond quickly and urgency. So we're heavily biased to simplify things. So we have this bias that likes to take us back to binaries. And let's see, and take us away from infinities and uncertainties. And that seems to be yes, I agree. the direction that you're going in.

Unknown 1:10:02
So it's possible still, then my first answer applies here. Because the first part of the answer in the sense that you can still reconcile a structure, which is highly counterintuitive, like, let's say, the structure of field theory, where you have infinities popping up everywhere, with the presents of with the presence of the definition of an information variable, which is a completely discrete and finite set of states. So it's possible to construct a model that complies to this intuitive, discrete type of structure within a theory that still allows for infinities and and continuum and so on, such as field theory. In other words, what we're saying is compatible with certain kinds of infinities. And and so I don't I don't see them in contradiction, necessarily. It's just that the statements are making at the level of the possible impossible tasks should be seen as the fundamental explanations for everything else, and not the other way around. Yeah.

Unknown 1:11:05
smacks of bias to me, but I can see why the bias is there. Well, I suppose biologists

Unknown 1:11:12
Yeah, I suppose all all things. Bias. I mean, it's impossible to approach any problem without bias. Everyone is background noise. So in a sense, yeah, I suppose. You know, the whole of quantum theory is biased, or the whole of Newtonian. Do.

Unknown 1:11:37
All right, thank you so much. And then we have Dan gursha, which Dan? I'm gonna unmute you now. See, harder to do that. I thought. Sometimes it takes forever to unmute someone out. Now. I muted him. Now. unmuted, that'd be

Unknown 1:12:05
thank you for taking the time, Kara. Really appreciate it. I'm Dan. And for the last question, I guess, I'm really curious about what constructor theory has to say about observer independent facts. There's a paper I think I just posted to the chat about the inability for modern physics to say certain things are objective. And it seems from what we've been talking about with probabilities. And what I know about how can knowledge and Constructor theory are tied together? That, in a sense, it's a purely local or purely subjective approach? And that, would it be fair to say, you wouldn't be able to say, you wouldn't be able to make purely objective claims using constructor theory.

Unknown 1:12:55
Right. So So I think the as I was saying earlier, in reply to another question, the so the the take in constructor theory, which is actually I would say the taking all our laws of physics we have is that the most fundamental entities are actually objective, and they are observing independent. So I know that there is, let's say, a, you know, even in quantum theory, there is often a narrative about quantum theory that says that things are dependent on who is observing, what, for example, you know, there is this famous title of a famous paper saying is the, whatever flux there if nobody looks so, so, this is referring to the fact that when you have a quantum superposition of various values that come comes a moment where someone is performing an observation of their superposition, and suddenly one of the various values become real for that observer or, or something like that. Now, I think that's not. So this is an interpretation of quantum theory, which seems to me is not correct. And if you, if you, if you look at quantum theory properly, you take it seriously, and you're not adding other assumptions on top. Quantum Theory just tells you that there is an objective reality made of the quantum wave functions, and then the measurement is just another quantum interaction. And you can describe it all nicely and consistently, in every segment you can make about entanglements, superpositions, outcomes, probabilities, all of these things are objective. And they are observing dependent in the sense that having fixed the coordinate system, everyone and even people sitting in different coordinate systems will agree on what's happening. Module of course, proper, you know, translating properly between their own way of predicting and the way of predicting all the different observer But the the fact that let's say, according to relativity that can be, you can compute the probabilities of the outcomes of certain experiments in different coordinate systems doesn't invalidate the statement that the output that you get out of these calculations are referring to objective facts. And there's just one truth, one fact of truth of the matter, that refers to the physical system that you're describing. And I think this is true in all physical theories we have in common construct a theory is the same. And to convince you of this, even if you don't want to go in to construct a theory details, you can just take the conservation of energy, which is an example of a principle that has the same logic as construct the theories principle. And it's well known, because it's just already part of the structural physics, when you say that the energy is conserved in a certain physical theory, that is an objective statement, it doesn't depend on whether there are observers around or it doesn't depend on on the, you know, particular way of looking at the system in question. It is just the fact. And it's just says that, you know, if you've got the system with a certain energy, in order to change it, you have to bring the energy from somewhere else, or take it away into move it to some other location in space time. And that's it. And I think the, the spirit of the, the logic behind all of the segments in constructor theory is very similar to the, to the logic of the conservation of energy. So we are hoping that this approach is very much objective. And I would be very wary of statements about observed dependence, because although it's true that there are some, some quantities that, you know, in relativity, you can express with different values in different reference frames, or in different coordinate systems as one fact. But that isn't in contradiction with the fact that there are objective entities in the theory of relativity, which are, you know, the symmetries of the laws. And there is other things that are actually the elements that we're using to describe physical reality. So I very much support and I think I'm hoping construct a theory does the same, I support the view that, let's say, science to provide some objective view of reality. Alright, right. And thank you so much, then observers should be describable. Fully within the theory, that's one lesson that we got from quantum theory, even macroscopic observers like us, can be included in the laws of quantum theory, let's say and I think construct materials can can be applied in a sense to, to entities like, like, macroscopic observers.

Unknown 1:17:49
Thank you so much. I like I forgot one question by Harrison from earlier. Maybe, you know, he could, if you don't mind, you could ask the question. And then you can decide either to take it or to do and maybe you could weave that into a few final remarks of a kind of like, what's happening now? Is there a book coming out? And I think I said that in the introduction, but you know, so that we have like a little little roundup of how we can find out more about you. And now, I'll unmute Harrison, and I think the question is really worth it. Okay, let's see. Harrison. Yeah. unmuted. Hi, Chiara.

Unknown 1:18:24
Thanks so much for coming on. I wanted to learn more about this stuff for a while. And I think this idea that you have in your program, of taking the sort of like possibilities statements, and making them sort of the primaries and the dynamical laws and making them, you know, the epiphenomena of those primaries, rather than the reverse, as we see today is really cool. That being said, the primary content of like, Dynamical Theory isn't just like, there's a dynamical law, but like what the mathematical statement of those laws like is. And so I guess this is a question about, like, where you are in your research program? Can you give us a sense of what the mathematical statement of a constructor theory or several different constructor theories would look like, in the same way that like, Newtonian mechanics is an example of a compelling mathematical statement of this sort of like state and continuous transition function idea? Like what would the math of like, you know, what it is possible to construct look like?

Unknown 1:19:24
That's a nice question. I think. I started to mention something earlier into, you know, in reply to another question, the and I think it's nice that you're kind of asking this because the, sort of the way in which the theory looks is very different from dynamical laws, it doesn't have dynamical laws directly. And the the basic formal objects are tasks and these tasks are basically if I can use some jargon, they are sets of states input output states and so Being sets, you can? Well, you can think of them as being composable with one another. So there's an algebra of these tasks. And so the current way in which we're presenting our results is based on set theory combined with algebraic tools that describe the properties of the algebra of tasks. And then there are, there's a combination of, of, well, there are some rules that say how possible impossible tasks composed together. So there is there is also function, which is this function that tells you whether a task is possible or impossible. There is like a label that we put on top of these sets. And I think the these are very rudimentary mathematical tools, if you like. So, you know, I've got, as I said, some collaborators who are trying to rephrase these statements and results that we have in terms of more sophisticated maths, which is basically category theory. So I think, if you want to know what construct a theory of, you know, fully fledged theory of constructors would look like. Sorry, I'm in fully fledged constructor theory will look like in the future, it should be expressed with seems like the natural way of expressing it is category theory. Having said that, I think the current results are mathematically rich in themselves. And I think it's possible to see this even with this set theory approach that we currently have. And in fact, you know, if, if anyone has suggestions about, you know, different tools that one could use, it will be welcomed, you know, because we were really exploring something very different from the standard. Standard, Dan Kalasa, urine physics. And although it would mean these Dynamic Laws are compatible, we say, the kinds of statements and the proofs that we make are, you know, just follow a different format structure. So happy to get suggestions. And from from anyone in the audience.

Unknown 1:22:14
I think you've got one already in the chat. And is there a way in which people could follow up with you work specifically that I may have not mentioned yet? Or is there a way where we can

Unknown 1:22:23
I can? Well, my email is on the internet. And I'm very happy as well, there are there's constructor theory.org, which is the platform where we kind of post our results. But also, as I said, If anyone wants to ask more questions, you can Google me and there is an email address. So I'm kind of have very happy to reply to further questions. And I will find the Neumann article and maybe send it to you and you can is it possible to send it

Unknown 1:22:52
back when we have an email list? Yes. Okay, excellent. Fantastic. Hey, Chiara, I can't thank you enough. I think, you know, it was a very, very well enjoyed salon by everyone. Thank you so much for making the time. So spontaneously, I can't wait to get the book. Maybe we can have you back on when the book is out. And for now, thank you so, so much for making time. I'm going to follow up with you about the video. And then I'll follow up with all of you guys to share the video development links. For now I'm going to open up breakout rooms. If people want to continue the discussion informally. I won't be there. So please be nice to each other and you know, maybe introduce yourselves in the chat. And the breakout rooms should be open. And I hope to see many of you again next Thursday for Andrew Sanford from the future of humanity Institute at Oxford, for another Salaam. Thank you so much Chiara from all of us. It was really fantastic to have you.

Unknown 1:23:46
Thank you so much. Thank you everyone for the questions. Take care bye

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai