Joscha Bach 0:00
So yeah, I'm a nerd myself. So it strikes me that in my community, people tend to think more often in terms of true and false, and then synchronize their opinions with arguments. That doesn't mean that they have worldviews are true, it just means that the worldviews are usually not found, by trying to converge with the people around you. Or as most humans have a tendency to think in terms of not true and false, but in terms of right and wrong, and right and wrong are not absolutes. They depend on your group of where you are of your society, your ideology, and so on. And if you try to get it right, instead of finding the true opinion, it means that you try to find a way to converge with the people you like most, which have the highest status in your envelope. And that's actually a good thing, because it made us very successful as a species, if you just try to find truth, you're not necessarily going to converge. So you should, in a society optimize for convergence, even at the cost of getting it wrong, it means that individuals probably have an evolutionary propensity to prefer convergence, to prefer giving up responsibility for their beliefs to the group mind over trying to think independently if this is dangerous them and getting into disagreement with the group. The difficulty is, of course, that if a group mind optimizes for convergence, then the group might might often be more stupid than the smartest individuals in the group. And this is something that is not very good for science. So there are a lot of nerds in science, because they can think in straight in groups, because they have difficulty converging. What I found is, when you look at the public discourse on this topic, and there was, for instance, this medium posts by Jonas and Zynga, who was an ex Google manager, who weighed in on this controversy, and suggested that this author of the memo should be immediately fired, because he said something that would create a much worse environment at Google. And if you look at the arguments that song abroad in his post, he first points out that the science doesn't support any claim that there are biological differences between men and women. The second one is that it is not acceptable to say that there are differences between men and women in their ability as engineers. And the third one is he said that women are more empathetic and therefore are more engineer better engineers than men. To an earth this seems to be like a contradiction, regardless of what the facts on the ground are. And I don't know what the facts on the ground are, because I didn't research this myself, and so many studies in that area. But it seems to be a contradiction. And it seems to me that Zunker does assume yes, on the ground, there are effects which do support such a difference, because otherwise, he wouldn't set have that third point. But for political reasons, we cannot make that point. And this leads to a very interesting difference in this course, because many of the nerds seem to think that this course is about content. It's about imparting information. So everybody can make their judgement autonomously and have their own opinion on how to deal with the world. And therefore we need to have the best collection of facts about everything and need to get these facts right. And for most people, the purpose of communication is coordination between groups between individuals and society. And if that is your primary objective, then the value of the fact that you present is the effect that it's going to have on the coordination between people. The lot of nerds don't seem to understand this, or they don't have the right intuition about this. And the intuition of most of the non nerds about this, that they get as much easier. And this is part of the controversy. Is Vincent, is Google memo, a statement about facts? Or is it a statement about how society or Google at this point should be organized? If you are in the former camp, you think that James d'amour who made wrote this memo made a statement about facts that you can dispute or critique or a grievance. And we should discuss these facts whether they are correct or not. And the second group thinks he made a statement that said, Google should change its hiring policies to hire fewer women. Because that might be the possible outcome of that discussion. And the people that are in the second camp think that he actually would oppose getting more women into Google, even though in his memo, he says he wants to have more diversity, and he thinks it's valuable. So what was his true intention about this? I don't know. But the really interesting thing about this is that different groups of people read this memo very, very differently. And it's very hard for them to get an agreement about the content of the memo, because how can you agree when you have different ideas about what truth is and communication?

Joscha Bach 4:54
And of course, you cannot get people to agree with something that's not in their interest to believe it proving the idea that truth matters

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai