Unknown 0:03
Hello, and welcome to IEEE soft robotics podcast. In this podcast, we are going to interview researchers from Pulse academia and industry about the work assaults spectrum. And more beyond that, this moral edge really, I hope you will find this podcast useful. If you would like to connect with us, simply send us and we will be happy to hear from you. And here is my interview. Thanks.

Unknown 0:31
Hello, and welcome to the Top robotics podcast. Hello, Josh, thanks so much for Jonathan's book cos store and have you. So I'd like to ask you first how you'd like to define yourself for the audience. Maybe first time listen to you, I would like to define yourself.

Joscha Bach 0:44
I'm a cognitive scientist, I try to understand how the mind works using the tools and perspectives of artificial intelligence and computational modeling.

Unknown 0:55
So I'm curious about your childhood? Do you have any memories about your childhood that leads you to question your child's body? Do you have any memories about

Joscha Bach 1:01
that? I grew up in a remote place in Eastern Germany, I was lonely, I grew up in the house of an artist that was full of books. And because I was bored, I read everything I could get my hands on. And in 1983, I managed to convince my family to buy me a Commodore 64. And I had to write all my software myself. And so I learned how to code. And I realized that everything that I can fully understand I couldn't put behind that screen. And what is it that I want to put behind that screen something to talk to the mind, ideally, entire world full of mines? And that led me to the question, how do mines work? What kind of algorithms run on brains. And so I studied philosophy and computer science and a bit of psychology and neuroscience, and eventually decided that the best way to make progress is to focus on the area of artificial intelligence.

Unknown 1:59
That's one additional curious, ask you one question, do you think you've been this upbringing to be remotely alone was beneficial to you are all experiences that leads you to, to isolate yourself from what your generation were thinking about? You think it was contributing in that way or for style of your way of thinking, and

Joscha Bach 2:20
it made me who I am for better overs. And I don't think that my life trajectory is one that I would particularly recommend to anyone. And it made me definitely into an outlier, because I found that Eastern Germany is a very weird country to live in, they had a very veered public way of thinking about things that didn't make sense. And so I had to build my own perspective on reality, and maintain a critical perspective on everything and build my own connections to the intellectual world. And this has led me to bigger and bigger cities, I spent 20 years in Berlin, and then worked in universe to have osnove work in the department for cognitive science, which was the only one of its kind of Germany. Eventually, it led me to Cambridge, Massachusetts, and then to San Francisco, because there are too few people that I can interact with and other places, or maybe there are this critical mass, but the most interesting conversations can be had in very few places in the world. And that's very stressful, because I have to drag my family away from the grandparents and it will remote strange lands. And

Unknown 3:37
absolutely, yeah. But I'm curious in that we, do you have any moment. lusion Do you think because you try to understand things and we will discuss but do you have a moment? What do you feel that it is is this illusion or didn't

Joscha Bach 3:50
commit enlightenment? Yeah, epiphanies? Yeah, one thing that struck me was that there is nothing what it feels like to wake up from a dream or trance that you are in, if you experience yourself waking up, you're dreaming that you're waking up. And it was a very big step for me to realize that we don't live in a physical world, but we live in a virtual world is generated by our own brain. And so develop that you touch the world that you interact with is not the physical world, there are no colors and sounds and physics is a function that your brain is computing, to make sense of the patterns that the universe is throwing at you. The only thing that we can say about the universe with some certainty is that it's a pattern generator. And then we make models on different levels, about how these patterns work. And then most of the poor epiphanies that I'm having are about the nature of these models. So the types of functions that we're computing and how they relate to each other. And it's not that my thoughts in this field are terribly original. It's more that the parties that I discover, to which I'm late are getting smaller and smaller. So they are fit ideas and intellectual traditions that have been around since forever, that they are just not being discussed that much in the mainstream of philosophy and AI.

Unknown 5:15
What do you mean getting a smaller, smaller? What do you mean about that? Oh, it

Joscha Bach 5:19
means that there are fewer and fewer people which have the same ideas. So basically, when you're engaging with elementary arithmetic, you're part of an extremely large community. When you're engaging this machine learning and linear algebra, you're part of a much smaller community. And when you are engaging with the Foundations of Mathematics, and how to derive what a model is, and so on, and how this relates to conscious experience, you suddenly realize that you are working at the intersection between observing the universe and reasoning about how observations work in general, how modeling works for the relatively few people in the world. So it's, it's a conversation that takes place between a few 1000 people.

Unknown 6:01
Yeah, I'm curious to ask you about why do you think we as a human or human brain, why do you think that we don't see as a reality as it is? Do you think it's maybe fitness pay off that we are designed in a certain way, so that we can perceive the reality? Is this? And why do you think we don't have to have this kind of see the reality? Is that, would it make a difference to humans? In general? Are people listening that? Should I care about that?

Joscha Bach 6:26
No, we cannot know what reality is, I think unless we are able to deduce all possible universes from first principles. As an observer that tries to make sense of the world that you're in, you only have discernible differences at your systemic interface. And then you try to discover functions that relate these discernible differences to each other in a unified model of the universe. And this is something that every information processing autonomous agent, like a cat, or a bird, or an insect is doing just at different levels of abstraction. And so what's different between different people is the degree of abstraction. But what's also different is the epistemology that we are using that is the criteria by which we decide what's true. And it I think, for most people, it's a discovery that we need to make that something is true independently from what other people think. Most people form their beliefs based on what the environment beliefs and try to sync up as these beliefs. And that makes sense because we coordinate this large groups, and we share a sense of sacredness with them a sense of the meaning that we relate to the kind of system that we are part of, and the system that we are part of needs to have coherent agency and beliefs and models of reality. But if you are thinking together as a group, your thoughts are, in some sense limited to the resolution at which you can have shared common denominator. And this means that very subtle thoughts can often not be sought together as a group. And to be able to think about reality in subtle ways. You need to be willing to completely disengage with what other people think, and build your own model until you see that it makes sense intrinsically. And the best thing that you can discover is not the truth, what you can discover is the shape the outline, have a space of theories that could explain the observations that you're making. That's not one theory, it's an entire space of theories. If there are multiple possibilities, you're not free to pick one, you have to quantify your agnosticism. Logical principle that the confidence that you have a new belief must equal the evidence to support it. And that includes meta beliefs. That is an important rule that some people discover, and most people don't. So most people form their beliefs based on the say so of other people. And this leads to conflicts between groups, because most people don't live in a world of true and false but in the world of right and wrong, and it looks almost the same. But the right one world has different axiomatic it depends on largely on what other people in both groups think. And that changes based on rules that are not rational.

Unknown 9:13
That's very interesting. I guess this Cuba case, do you think as a human inevitability, do you think that this kind of conscious experiences or just maybe gut feeling or the way that you can discern and you know, really influenced by the group thinking or the way of the believes you have to have? Do you think this conscious comes from where is it something beyond the brain as body it's something we don't know what it is? Or how this is this kind of that individual have some time is that something if, for example, it just I can understand how to squat down a gut feeling that you can discern situation? So everything that sounds right to you, where you still can estimate that's right or wrong, or maybe I don't know how this actually come from is something beyond what we have already something we don't understand. I don't know how to see that.

Joscha Bach 10:00
There are a number of people and philosophers which have understood it again and again over the centuries. And if you look for it, we find it in many philosophical traditions. The core of the insight is that we don't live in physical reality, we live in a dream. And a dream, many things are possible that are not possible in physics like conscious experience. And consciousness is virtual, we live in a virtual world, it's a simulacrum, it means that our brain is generating observables, that don't necessarily have an underlying causal structure, but that are necessary to tell a story about an agent in a world. So this agent can plan its actions, you have feelings, for the same reason that the character novel has feelings, because it's being written into the story. And you have nothing but that story, that story is not made from text. Of course, it's a multimedia novel that is made from all modalities, all the languages in which we encode our experiences, or in which the brain encodes the experiences fast. I don't think that's done outside of the brain. Because if I switch my brain, my conscious experience changes in the same way as my visual experience changes when I switch my eyeball. In fact, when I squish other things in the universe, my conscious experience doesn't change. Right. So there are very distinct parts of the world that I experience that I need to squish, or they need to change, for instance, by using medications, or if I have an accident and banged my head, or if I'm sleepy, all these things affect my brain. And it's all it is apparently, the brain that is generating these experiences. And the fact that these experiences don't appear to be physical is correct, because they're not physical, right? They, they are the dream that the brain is experiencing. And that's the person that I am is nothing that I am objectively, I'm not really a monkey, I am a side effect of the regulation needs of a monkey, I am a mind I am a general system of sensemaking that has an attentional system that can make singled out features and interpretations and make a protocol of them to visit them later. So in some sense, I am what I perceive to be on the other side of attention, I am that the result of my attentional control model. And the self is the story that the brain has tells itself like other stories, and when I managed to dissociate from that story, I might experience myself as being one with the universe, or I can see myself or everything else from different perspective, because the self is just a construct among many other constructs, in my own mind. So the entire universe that you experience is a creation by your own brain. And that's the same is true for every other person. And in this creation of this universe, that you experience as the physical reality as the truth that you cannot under deny, right, this is not deniable because it's constructed outside of the self. But this in your own mind.

Unknown 13:01
That's very interesting. But I'm just asking that case, for you, as yourself, I don't know what maybe something to change if you win, because I think it's really hard when you have this kind of we constructed everything based on our frame or perspective. But I'm just willing to try and have a different perspective. I don't know how you manage to see the reality of the truth from different perspective, not for me, because it's something shows we're human beings in general, that we need to understand things. It's super challenging life in general. So what does make techniques do yourself this, you understand that things? What do you think we can do that we can have different perspective or sees a reality that is, beyond what we have in our brain? Do you think Is it challenging for you in general, it is

Joscha Bach 13:47
challenging, but it's what we do, we make models of everything that we are interacting with. And when we interact with other people, they make models of their own minds of their own mental states. And the older we get, the more attention we pay, the better we are able to read their thoughts and see the world through their eyes. And in some sense, you could say that, we might be beginning to out model them in the same way as we out modeling ourselves. So we are making models have our own psyche of our own agency, and of the way in which you construct these models as well. And the sense of you become more and more self aware. And this degree of awareness that we have also allows us to interpret others and how they construct their self and how their own psyche and agency works. I'm no longer entranced by what other people are saying in the sense if I do this, but I have a firewall, which means if other people have ideas, these are their ideas, they have reasons for having these ideas. I tried to understand these reasons. This doesn't need to mean that these ideas in any way true because there might be confused about the way in which they make sense of reality. And then most people there is a vast disconnect between the rational models that they have about the world and the intuitive Got models that they have about the world. And the intuitive models or perceptual models for which you don't have a rational explanation, which means you don't have an analytical grammatical mechanism to take them apart and translate them into knowledge that you can criticize. This rational mind is very sharp, but also very small and brittle instrument that is required to fix perception that fixes your intuitions in the darkest corners where they don't give good results. And you're mostly driven by these perceptual models that 90% of your brain is generating in ways that you don't necessarily understand. So I tried to reverse engineer that especially variously conflict.

Unknown 15:40
That's, that's also, what is the greatest kind of difference in design the brain? Why do you think we don't have the same structure? Or at the same way, although it may be intuitive or rational? Why do you think there's differences when it comes, but kind of pushing desync? still hard to get it? And why are you still wondering, why is this happening?

Joscha Bach 15:59
At some level, there are very similar modes of making sense. That's because our visual cortex for instance, works at a certain speed at certain rate, and has certain number of units available. And there is a certain resolution that we have on our retinas. And when we try to make sense of them, there are for mathematical reasons, limited sets of features that can be discovered that we can use to construct our visual reality from there are subtle differences in these low level features. For instance, some people have perfect pitch, when they hear and survive relative pitch that is, they perceive sounds based relative on the bass sound and others perceive sounds absolutely. So they use a global oscillator to compare the frequency of the sound to or they use local oscillators to compare the frequency of the sound to both are valid ways of interpreting sound. One is higher resolution than the other, but both of them are valid ways in which you can make sense of the same underlying reality. And in this way, we do have slightly different models at the feature level. And the further up you go in the abstraction of these models, the more we have more degrees of freedom, the higher we go up in the perceptual hierarchy and the hierarchy of sense making. So for instance, when we construct faces and expressions, we use different prototypes for the emotions and for the faces. And as a result, faces that might look similar to you might look dissimilar to me and vice versa. And the more abstract we go, the less similar our concepts will become. And many of the categories that we form, are the result of being prompted by the environment. So when we are discussing ideas with others, we use the categorical distinctions that are being used by our environment, to train classifiers into our own brain, to tear things apart in a specific way. There are also different ways in which the self might be constituted, and which itself is relating to the greater whole that we are part of. So we have different shapes of sorts, different relationships to transcendence, different modes of sacredness, and they fundamentally define in which we perceive our relationship to the world and to each other. And not all people are the same in this way. But he can understand these modes, he can understand how other people operate. I think

Unknown 18:21
that I guess the skew in the way the brain well designed by the human, I think that's how to have this kind of continual learning and also be generic and adaptable to different situation. We are designed to adapt. But still there's limitations. When you look at that deploying to machine, I will get this machine has kept continual learning generic and adaptable. And when you think about missing understanding, you see the human brain be designed, in a way you think there's a limitation and there has been a room that is thing that could be much better than that. How do you see that limitation? For our brain? Do you think that should be much better? You imagined in a certain way? I don't know. I'm just curious about that. And the way we are designed to be adaptable using the machine can also have these features this container to uncertain situation. Or there's limitation maybe, in general, when you see the human brain and the way to learn and be adapting as well.

Joscha Bach 19:15
The paradigms that we use in AI when we build machines at the moment are very different from the way in which organisms process information. If I sent a query or a prompt to an AI system like GPT, three, it's it spins up, and then within a few tenths of a second, it gives you a response. And in this fraction of a second, it is spinning up into a small dream and then creates a projection of the dream into an output. But it's not continuously coupled to the environment in our own mind. We have a continuous coupling with the sensory data and the quantity try to predict the next frame and every think that our brain is doing almost everything is related to creating models of what's going to happen next and making it understandable, intelligible salient. And this includes our own internal structure, our own agency. And this direct coupling, where you will change in real time, the model of the environment and update your ideas about the environment in real time. So you can always track things even when the reality changes. This is very different from the way AI systems work at the moment. Yes, so the models of reality that we are, that organisms are making a different from the models of reality, they are not simulation models that act in real time. They're not tuned directly to track sensory experience on all channels, that an eight which we perceive things, and they don't lead to a unified model of the universe that we are in. Right, every organism has a unified model of the universe is not disjoint domain specific models. But it's one global model, and the meaning that we experience of any thing that we have in our attention is the relationship that it has to the unified model of the universe.

Unknown 21:09
Yeah, so I guess the skin the belt, the resilience for remembering, or kind of redundancy on when it comes to machine machine as well. So do you think I don't know how this is a redundancy? If there's damage happening? Or how do you see the brain can adapt to that. And when it comes to the machine as well, designing for artificial intelligence using the concept of redundancy or resilience, so that it was damaged companies tilgang figured out or adapt to that?

Joscha Bach 21:35
Yes, many discussions, we see this argument that it's very hard to simulate an individual neuron at this high accuracy. And then we take the trillions of neurons that we have on the brain, how are the 86 billion neurons in the neocortex? And the cranium? How many computers? Would it need to simulate all these neurons? But these neurons are highly indeterministic? And it's an interesting question to ask yourself, how many neurons or how many brains would you need to run Windows or MacOS without crashing great because the degree of determinism that you get out of these neurons is very low. And so everything in the brain is constructed based on a best effort principle, every unit cannot rely on the other units being completely deterministic. But being better than chance every pilot is doing as well as it can in every part is designed in such a way or is designing itself in such a way that it can deal with the fact that the environment is unreliable. And another thing is that the brain is organized in such a way that the individual units, the neurons in them don't have to learn very much they mostly converge. So they are finding themselves in environments where they are prompted by their surrounding tissue signals, that they have to learn a certain function, if they learn that function, this activation function that tells the individual your event to fire, they are able to do this job as well as any other neurons. So if an individual neuron dies, it can be replaced by a different neuron that will learn the same function in this environment, it's Imagine that you are living in or working in a very big corporation. And the cooperation is getting good processes for everything, you are still required to do your job well. But you may not have to understand the organization its entirety, you just have to understand your local environment. And in this local environment, you have to convert. And if you get ill, or if you drop out of the company, you can be replaced by somebody else who is learning that same function. Right. And this is the nature of organizations that the individual is to some degree replaceable, because it is able to the differences between the individuals in the same way as there are differences between the individual neurons. But the specific role that is being fulfilled is defined relative to the structure that you're part of not relative to yourself. And this makes the individual neuron replaceable. And even brain regions replaceable because you can test if you have a brain lesion, put in new neurons in this region, and they can try to reconstruct the function that had been done by this group of neurons before this new group came in.

Unknown 24:21
That's very interesting. If there's any scenario like, I don't know, curious deconversion it doesn't doesn't go to what we see exactly in the situation, because if it has to be converging to a certain learning behavior, in any scenario, like decentralized AI does doesn't have to, I don't know

Joscha Bach 24:38
what happens a lot, right? Most of the things that psychologists deal with are either problems in brain chemistry or in the brain development that cannot really be overcome like schizophrenia, or the SAF modeling defects, where you are not converging to the global optimum of models, but you convert into a local optimum. And this local optimum, you are committed to seeing the world in a particular way. And you don't fail because the world is against you, but you feel because your models of the world are not accurate, and you try to make the world conform to your models. And so what the psychologist has to help you with is to adapt by changing your models of who you are and how you relate to reality. And that's very hard because the self that you are using a steward giver of perspective, is ruling that universe and it doesn't want to give up it doesn't want to die. It doesn't want to replace be replaced by something else. Because if that could happen, it would have already happened.

Unknown 25:38
That's very interesting that maybe a question here? Why do you think we don't understand ourselves? Maybe Maybe? I don't know if that's a question about if we have our brain as a machine and our bodies and we still we don't understand our soul very well. Do you think this is something which is important for you, when you design that model, or the music why humans don't understand themselves, I think there's something also hard for us with a human, sometimes many years, and we don't understand how actually, we work or how we behave. Or I don't know if that's something interesting for you,

Joscha Bach 26:07
it is very much, but it's an ongoing process, when you are an infant, the pleasure and pain feel your entire perception right revealed is either full of plain or full of pleasure, there is no anticipation of the change, you can see that it's absolute, when you look at it's a small baby. And at some point, the baby learns that pleasure and pain out in it, and that the pain will pass and the pleasure of come again. And the baby can be contented conveyed even if something hurts a little bit. Alright, and at some point, it realizes that pleasure and pain are attached to objects, and that they relate to these objects and certain objects are to be sought out and others are to be avoided. And then later, we realize that pleasure and pain are aspects of our reaction to objects. They're not at the objects themselves. But we can choose to some degree, how we react, and we can create situations that will contain pleasure and pain for us. And we can modify the interpretation of these situations in our own mind. So for instance, at some point, I saw my three year old daughter sitting in her corner, and alternating, crying out and terrible, and pleasure and delight, and I was asking her what she was doing. And she was imagining the best movies from scenes from her favorite movies, and the most horrible things that you could imagine, in utter automation, to increase this maximum of the data of the experience. And it was a way in which she was starting to understand how your own experience worked. Right. It was a series of experiments that she conducted on her own mind, to learn something about how she operates. And at some point, we realize how we construct ourselves and this, that itself is a representation. And this is typically called enlightenment, that this notion that you realize that everything is representational. And you realize this at an operational level, which means you can disengage from the reflexive interpretation of reality from this reflexive instincts, which tell you which is good or bad. And you realize that your aesthetic reactions to the world and your pleasure and displeasure is only a representation inside of the mind that can be changed. And the deeper you go into this, the more you understand yourself only, it's nothing that you can expect to master as a child or as an adolescent. It's the process that typically takes many decades of observation and learning. So I suspect that for the first 400 years, we are still children.

Unknown 28:35
Yeah. That's very important. But do you think with that, do you think, do you believe that we live in simulation because of them? Don't have mine, Nick Bostrom? Do they? They have different view about that. But for you, do you think based on that, as a human and the way already, maybe have a limitation isn't the fitness as we are environment that we designed for you think we live in simulation and the game or I don't know how to see it that way.

Joscha Bach 28:58
So what is the difference between a simulation and reality? I think the core difference is that the simulation shows a causal structure that pretends to be a causal structure, but it's built on something else. For instance, a computer game gives you a notion of space. And that is not emerging from some elementary causal physics. But that is emerging from an abstract language that only pretends to be a space. Right? It's, it's a simulation of movement in space. And it's a good enough simulation. So it fills your brain and you can interact with it in a causal way, that is similar to the cause of it in which you interact with the world when you move about not in VR, but in the physical world, right. The difference also is that the simulation is symbolic interactions. There are interactions which are in their nature, not mechanical, you can in Minecraft call up a shell and type in times a day and the sun will rise. And as far as I know, this is not possible in the world that you're in. It doesn't seem To be a vector, there don't seem to be symbolic magical interactions, the magical inter rituals if you can perform a mostly affecting the psyche in the social world, the way in which we in very subtle ways interact with ourselves and with other people. So I suspect that yes, we are living in a simulation, but it's a simulation generated by your own cortex. In this sense, we are living in a simulation. But they believe that the primate is embedded in this physical universe seems to be entirely mechanical, to me that it doesn't seem to be the result of some kind of conspiracy, that or some kind of simulation that runs in a computer in the next level universe. But I mean, it's tempting to think that if you are a simulation in your own brain, and all the other people that you meet are simulations in your own brain that exist to explain your sensory data, whose brain are you running on? So we are living in a simulation that is generated in our own brain. And this simulation is generated to make sense of the sensory data. And in this sense, we are living in a simulation but the ground truth behind that doesn't seem to be a simulation. Of course, it's, it's the question of when you are a simulation in your own brain, and the self is a simulation and the other people that you're observing in your around, you also created a simulation in your own brain to explain your sensory data. Whose brain are you running on? And whose brain are you actually running on? Can you ever guarantee that you're actually running on your own brain, and are not just a simulacrum in somebody else's brain? And I think the answer is that we are all simulations and Elon Musk's brain that makes total sense. That makes sense by us spending all the time right? The world is a simulation for the benefit of

Unknown 31:53
that I'm just ask a quick question here about the dreams because I saw your other interview speak about that. And I'm really genuinely curious about dreaming as a human, and what kind of maybe sometimes it has a lot of meaning. But scientifically speaking, what do you think dreaming is all about you think it's messages as well as about if you give up dreaming that you have a dream? And and you have to do XYZ not have dream is just maybe true. But do you think that scientific is true beyond religion, etc? But is it true that we can communicate through dreams? And then when you go, that's what happens sometimes I don't know if you believe in that or not, but I'm speaking on science do you think the human will what's happening to them as a brain when he's leaving and have kind of three as a message I don't know that do you think is scientifically has a meaning or, but doesn't make sense to you at all.

Joscha Bach 32:40
Dreams are states at night, during which we are decoupled from sensory input, and the brain is performing some reorganization. And I think part of the purpose of dreams is to create better low energy states to find global optima in which we perceive reality during the day. It make local changes based on what we learned, but we stay constantly online, we have to because we cannot stop making sense of reality while we learn, right, so we can only make local changes that don't affect the rest of the representations. And at night, these changes are distributed over the neocortex. So we get a globally better model in which you can integrate the experiences of the day. And another role of dreams is data augmentation, which means we create experiences based on the constraints that we have learned that create new scenes. So we can recognize these new scenes from your perspective. For instance, for the objects that we have seen, we create new perspectives. So we can recognize these objects from angles that we haven't seen before. And I suspect that's the reason why many of us have flying dreams as a child, because the brain is creating all these perspectives. And then it spins off into the idea of you looking at the world top down, and you must be flying, right. And so it creates that experience. If you are talking to say Gaia, the mind of the planet, of the ecosystem on the planet and your dream is this really Gaia that is talking to you? Well, it's your best understanding of Gaia that is talking to you. It's an interpretation of what it would be like to be a god of his biosphere. And you take that perspective and talk to the individual and if you talk to God to the spirit of your civilization, you are talking to the best understanding that your brain is able to generate of that entity Right? to actually learn to talk how to God, something in your brain needs to learn to think like a god and discover that agency in the world and this agency can be discovered if enough people implement it. And that allows you to talk to it right and it's this confusion exists because you think you are your brain but you're not. You're just one of the many things that your brain is comprehending.

Unknown 34:57
So maybe quick question here about how the brain can make the right In this discern the right understanding or not, you think what's contributed to that?

Joscha Bach 35:07
The only criterion that you have is whether your understanding is predictive of reality. So can you explain the present observations based on the past observations? And can you integrate over your memories of the past observations to the degree to which this is coherent, this degree to which you can decide that you have a good model? And I don't think that you have better criteria.

Unknown 35:29
When it comes to LMS, can you relate that? Do you think one is kind of integrating new experiences? How does memory that you have to, for example, learn how to, as we see it sometimes that you write a plane or something has kind of the memory of learning experience can be induced at one time as I'm just maybe a naive question. But when you try to learn something, you take a lot of time, it's a procedure for protection. Sometimes, that happens all the time. He makes me more about that.

Joscha Bach 35:59
When we understand time, we have a subjective sense of time that is given by the connection to global clocks and the brain and to the density of events that we store in a given moment. So for instance, when we have say, a bicycle accident, and we fall off the bicycle, we might remember the scene taking place in highly reserved time. So time slows down. And that's because this event is very important for you. It's traumatic, it's possibly life threatening. So the brain stores it was an extremely high resolution to all the details are being stored. And because you store more bits per unit of time, you experience the time being longer just because there are more events happening in this more features connected to these events. And this is one way in which we perceive time, sometimes time seems to fly fast, sometimes it goes slow. But there are absolute clocks in our brain. So I can tell myself, I want to wake up and listen this time in the evening. And if I'm not jet lagged, or sleep deprived, that usually works. So I will wake up at a certain time. And it works relatively well within a couple of minutes accuracy, or maybe even better sometimes. So can fake up briefly before the alarm clock goes on. And this means that there is an absolute clock running in my brain as well, that is in training itself is calibrated mechanisms that have some degree of reliability and predicting when that event is over. When you are listening to music, you know how long the different parts of the music are supposed to be?

Unknown 37:36
So maybe you can go for the audience question because I have a few questions. The first core question from Jack, what will he say that? How does civility of existence fit in with your definition of existence as implementation? Why not define existence as what is possible to be implemented?

Joscha Bach 37:54
I think that existence is what's actually implemented. So I would say that existence is to exist means to be implemented. And of course, that means that there has to be something that implements that some kind of substrate. And this leads us to the question of the ultimate substrate of reality. Right? We don't know what that is. Maybe it's mathematics. Maybe we exist in some kind of mathematical construct. And existence in this sense, is the default, everything that can be implemented, is implemented, and we are finding ourselves in a corner of that. But I don't know how to resolve that question. I don't have a good model of why there's something rather than nothing.

Unknown 38:35
Yeah. And he also say that you briefly said on Twitter that to understand consciousness, think about what is what is functionally indistinguishable from and consciousness as a principle. Those are really powerful statement, as you say that, and I was wondering if you could elaborate more on them, and perhaps explain the definition of your words at agency. And thank you for that.

Joscha Bach 38:59
So I think that agency becomes discoverable when you realize that there is a system that acts on the environment based on some kind of motivation. And it's that's not hard to implement. It's very easy to build a robot that, in some sense of wants to play soccer, that wants to get the ball into a goal, you can have a cybernetic system that has feedback loops that drive a certain behavior. And our own mind is driven by a number of these cybernetic feedback loops, I think so we have few 100 physiological drives that make us seek out certain food sources and physical safety and rest after exertion and so on. And then we have a dozen social drives that coordinate our interaction with others, and a handful of cognitive drives that form us, push us to learn new skills and to explore and to seek out statics, which means better representations. And we have to maintain a dynamic homeostasis between these drives. So we execute behaviors to satisfy all these agents have this space of needs that we need to fulfill. And we create a story about that we create models about this, in order to control an environment, you need to make a model of that environment that assembled isomorphic to it, you need to have the same dynamics as the domain that you want to control. And to your own agency is an important part of what you need to control. So at some point, you will discover your own agency, you will discover that there is a system that performs things based on your own models on the thing that is generated, write that annually on your own contents. And this is what you discover as yourself. This does not necessarily mean that you are conscious at this point, it just means that there is a self model now of an agent. And consciousness, I think is not an essence, consciousness is functionally indistinguishable from a system that can single out features. And integrate these features into an index index memory, so it can retrieve them later. And that is also representing the way in which it attends to it the mode, for instance, is the feature that I am attending to a sensory feature, or an integration of a sensory feature, or is it counterfactual? Is it an idea that I just test right now. So there are different ways in which you can hold and single out a feature and modify it. And this type of attention that you're performing is part of our attention. And the third one is reflexive attention, the way that our brain is organized, all the agencies that exist, there must be self organizing, and must be verifying what they are doing. And so the the attentional process needs to establish that it is indeed the attentional process and not just some other process spacing out, right. And so you have your singling out of features, interspersed with perceptions of feather you're still attending and whether you are that attending thing. And that all gets integrated into a protocol that you can retrieve, and act on by writing new content for the protocol or by making reports about other people and to other people about what you have been attending to so you report about your experiments, you report about you being parsing that story that you're generating. And so in some sense, there is a system that is generating the story, an authoring system, and that authoring system is a mechanism. It's similar to an AI that writes writing a story. And then inside of that story, there's an attention agent that singles out features based on the parts of the story that need to be attended to and connected to, to give the biggest expected improvement in the future. Right. The main purpose of this conscious attention is learning. And the activities of this attentional system are stored in the attentional protocol as well. And this attentional protocol is our stream of consciousness.

Unknown 42:52
Thank you for doing that. Yeah. And also, we have a question, what have you changed your mind about the past and why?

Joscha Bach 43:01
Well, there are many things that have changed my mind about I do this all the time. When I was 16 years old, I knew exactly what was in the best interest for the working class. And I changed my opinions a great deal. Once I understood that these were all adults that were acting not on ideological ideas that I found attractive as a teenager, but based on the point that in question of how they could bring their kids to school and whether they would be safe, and whether they could plan the future and interact with their friends in the way they wanted to. And that these practical, things are much more important. Another thing that changed my perspective was having children. And I realized that before you have children, the purpose of your existence is exploration. And it is traveling the world and traveling the space of ideas is invigorating and fascinating. But you're acting like a single celled organism and substrate of other single celled organisms. And suddenly you realize, when when you once you have children, that you are only instrumental that you are a temporary link in a chain that goes from the first cell to you. And it's your responsibility of whether at NC or not. And that everything that you did before was just jumping up and down and looking at things. And so you have this perspective, that the world is vertically organized, not horizontally that this moment in time and society and morality and sentiments is important. Know, what you realize is that societies and ideas come and go, but what stays our families are at the lines of, of our history. And Soviet plants growing in time, organisms growing in time. And big state building organism we as a species, built organizational units that stretched across time. So this has changed my perspective, a great deal.

Unknown 44:55
That's very wise. Yeah, I agree with you. And we have a question also. to pay that knowledge muscular while phenomenon like languages freewill and consciousness, morality, etc, and the results of biological processes they might ultimately be outside of human understanding, what do you think is likely we find answer in the short and long term future.

Joscha Bach 45:20
There are a number of positions in philosophy of mind on the mind body problem. And I would say that my own position could be described as a computational dysfunctional design, which means there are certain classes of language that we can use to describe reality. And that we have to use to describe reality. And that also our brain is using, and what you're describing the functional dependencies between observables. So we describe the world as a set of locations that can contain information. And it's free parameters in a way. And these parameters are connected to each other have certain constraints, which means if a parameter has this and this value, these are the states that the other parameters need to be in and these constraints are computable functions is a very general way of looking at models. And I can use this framework to make sense of foundational physics, but I can also use it to make sense of mental states and how we are constructed in there's another position in philosophy of mind, which is, for instance, about by calling MC Jin and Noam Chomsky, and it's called Mysterion ism. And Mysterion ism basically says that something cannot be understood if it cannot be understood as lupine one Chomsky. And not Chomsky knows that he is roughly the smartest individual of his generation, which I think is approximately true. So if Noam Chomsky cannot figure it out, nobody can figure it out. And I think that he cannot figure it out, because he is someone standing on his own feet and is not able to move, he has committed himself to certain ideas, that he has difficulty to retrace and to solve. By the way, this is quite typical. Could Kurt girdle discovered the incompleteness theorem in mathematics and was very disturbing to him, because he discovered that the thing that he experienced to be as true the classical sense in which tools was defined in his mathematics, lead to contradictions in mathematics. And so he was ready to basically to discard mathematics in a way because if mathematics turns to be out to be important at describing reality, as he experienced it, as a way his intuitions told him, The truth must work. It means that you are experiencing earthquake in the way in which you make sense of reality. And I think the solution was to revise the way in which we define truth. So we would have to have to come up with a new way of understanding what is true, and then the problem disappears. And this was the switch from classical mathematics to constructive mathematics or to computation. And I think that Chomsky has not made that switch fully. There was also some animosity between Chomsky personally, and the people that worked in the same city, as in Cambridge, on AI, Minsky, and Chomsky apparently never really got along and never synchronize the ideas. And so I wonder whether Chomsky is relative neglect for studying language. And Chomsky is utter neglect for studying anything outside of language, despite them being interested primarily in the notion of how minds work are related, because they couldn't stand each other.

Unknown 48:41
Thank you for that. And we have all sorts of questions. Can you comment on Lisa Feldman price theory in constructed emotion, the theory of constructed emotion.

Joscha Bach 48:53
And sometimes emotions are not natural kinds. They are perceptual styles, we describe emotions by looking at the ways in which our minds are modulated in a given situation. And so different ways in which you can group emotions into critical reasoning prototypes. I think what's invariant about emotions is that there are valence reactions. So there are things that you experience as good or bad. And many of these Valence is are shared across people. So we experience similar things as good or bad at some level, depending on how we are wired. And there are differences in our wiring, for instance, Ted steak, simple emotion like bliss or joy. If you compare them they are positively balanced reactions to a situation. We experienced the release of endorphins, maybe joy after we have run the race, maybe bliss after we have listened to poetry, and the difference between joy and bliss is that Bliss has high resolution and joy doesn't have to joy can have very low resolution. And so bliss needs to have have a low arousal state to maintain that deep resolution and joy. For instance, after the race, you might be relatively coarse and not be able to speak very detailed thoughts or very deep thoughts, but you don't need to write. So there's modulation of the resolution level that you are having, and of the valence. That is, I think, universal across people. So all people are able to experience joy and bliss, accepting depressed people, and so on, they might experience this to different degrees, and they may classify a different, potentially, it's the same. If you take an emotion like jealousy, that's a negative effect that is directed on a very particular situation, that is that you believe that you have a partner that might abandon you for somebody else. And that is highly relevant to you. And if you are unable to form that representation, or if you are unable to attach relevance to it, then you will not be able to experience jealousy. Right. So jealousy is also a human universal, it exists in all cultures, I think, and it exists in many people, but not in all of them. Because if you are in a romantic, if you are unable to fall in love, you typically will not have that sense that there is only one person in the world yet you can live with being enough, as opposed to platonic love is the courtship mode, it's one where you are trying to win over another person. And in that state, you are competing with others, and you can compete best if you are able to sell the other person that you are the best possible partner for them. And they don't see any alternative to you, the two of you being together, and you are best at this, if you believe it yourself. So we have evolved this mode of getting crazy about another person. Right? It's in some sense literally getting crazy, because it's irrational, it's and in this mode, we are often unable to imagine that we could be happy for somebody else. So the thought of losing that person is experienced as life threatening because your life will be meaningless if you don't get that person right. So, you could say that jealousy is an artifact of a courtship mode. But it is a human universal, that exists across cultures and they have different ways in which cultures relate to it and do visit and you can of course, find methods and techniques to get rid of jealousy or to subdue it. And yeah cultures which are integrating and accepting jealousy as something positive, and turn it into a source for normative rules, when there are other cultures which discourage it and dis inhibited, inhibited. And, of course, there are some groups of people where more people are able to experience jealousy than others. So for instance, if you are in a culture, in which polyamory is more novel than another one in a polyamorous relationship, it's much harder to experience jealousy, right? Because the individuals are, in some sense replaceable. And you might love them all individually for who they are. But if they find that they are better off being with somebody else than you, then and you truly love them, right, that is in their best interest. So why would you be opposed to this? So if you remove the fear of abandonment, most jealousy disappears.

Unknown 53:28
That's very interesting. I think that's also a huge struggle for humanity as across culture, we have that but maybe I'm just a skew white having first class with you. You supposed to have find the one for example. And you believe that you can't find anyone else, how it's happening of the state of mind that we have kind of jealousy that I didn't want, I just want this person. And this is kind of stupidity for us as a human because we feel in misery because I don't know how the brain is is evolving in that state. I don't know how to say it. But how we can be elevated that we can experience jealousy? Or maybe to have this kind of energy as well, our in our brain? I don't know if that question makes sense or

Joscha Bach 54:13
not if we built a simulation of creatures that are reproducing Peter sexually, and that need parental investment, and to have individuals that are jealous and guarding the access to their partner and others that don't, then you will find that after a certain amount of time. The creatures that are jealous become dominant, that is the out breed those that are not because they have more offspring that is their own that are feeding rather than other people's offspring. Right. So you can derive this bomb a simulation model. This means jealousy is an artifact that is bred into us by evolution because of the conditions that we are living under. And its interest seem to think about all the other traits that we're having to which degree they are results of our evolution, for instance, sex itself, we often connected sex to fertility. But the idea that we are procreating with somebody else, or just engaging in something that can lead to procreation, that's very, very dangerous. Right? It should be painful, because it's the economically and socially most consequential decision that you can make. It's very, very risky. So why are you doing that? So I suspect that people are clearly willing to have children without having sex, right, Derek are willing to have in vitro fertilization, which is painful and disgusting and expensive. And they because they want to have actually offspring under the right circumstances. And sex is more like a random offset of whom you're paying child support. Because you can be attracted by people that you should not be attracted to. Right. So I wonder if sex is more like a parasite that exists because our ancestors had that parasite too. So it's basically something that is infecting our civilizations that for 1000s of years have lived in environments where of having chosen first random strangers was not good. Or maybe it was good, maybe if this if he wouldn't have that we would only rationally be enter relationships and have children, with people that you think we should for economic and social reasons. And this is creating more interdependency in society and mixing up the gene pool. Right? So I don't know what the answer is why we still have sex. Right? It could be that it's an artifact of the times before we had civilization. And we have not read this out of our civilization. Or it could be that it does have some benefit, and not necessarily a benefit for the individual, but for the groups that have that trait. And so jealousy is also not necessarily something that helps the group but it doesn't help your genes. It doesn't help you as an individual, it makes your life just much harder if you're jealous. But we can understand the thing that we are subject to these forces and we can learn to overcome our reflexes for instance, by understanding the way in which our own courtship modes work and deconstructing that.

Unknown 57:20
That's very interesting. However, question also, can you explain in detail how but deletion allowed for perpetual motion machine and Minecraft.

Joscha Bach 57:32
So in Minecraft, there is no limit to against building a perpetual mobila. And that is because in Minecraft, there is no entropy. That is, in our own world, all the operations that we can observe are reversible, they're not necessarily time symmetric, so it means they don't go in the same way forward in time as backward in time. But every state in the world has exactly one possible preceding state. And this means the universe is not forgetting things, it's only permuting bits. And that means if you want to build local structure that is resilient against the disturbances that the universe does to it, you need to have a source of order that you can use to maintain this vocal order. If you want to delete bits locally, you need to flush them out of your system. Otherwise, these bits that you want to delete, for instance, the fluctuations in yesterday's body temperature and so on, will accumulate in some form in the information content of your system and will suffocate you. In our world. If you want to clean up something you need to make something else dirty. In Minecraft. If you want to do the clean up something you can just delete it. Right you can delete some of the history of Minecraft, when you remove blocks and put them somewhere else. There is no memory in Minecraft of how the blocks got from A to B. And this means that in Minecraft, you can build automata and machines that don't care about energy consumption. Because there is no conservation of information, the conservation of energy that we perceive in our world is in a result of the conservation of energy information and there is no conservation of information or Minecraft.

Unknown 59:09
Just a question, there's a message to dissolve the self.

Joscha Bach 59:16
There are multiple methods. But I'm not a meditation teacher about the so for some people, the self dissolves by itself without them interacting visit and that's often not beneficial. I also suspect that there's a reason why you have that self right. It exists to inform the actions of the organism. If you dissolve the self, you will no longer be an agent or you will be a different agent or you will no longer be in charge of that agent that is your attention is disconnected from the things that this agent is doing and you will just observe that the agent is doing you can observe and predict its decisions, but you will no longer have a sense of responsibility for them. So this may degrade your performance. Since even though it removes your suffering, but it of course, it only degrades your performance with respect to certain goals, like participating in society or raising children, or trying to impress people that you don't like, right? So it really depends what is the reason why you wanted to solve yourself. And you should basically, first accrue the necessary wisdom to decide why you want to change your own source code, before you go on about changing your own source code. That said, there are certain meditation techniques in which you can try to wake up in which you try to disengage yourself. So you have to realize that the world that you're looking on is basically a screen in the movie theater. And you identify with the cowboy on screen, and you think that the next stood out is vitally important. And, in fact, it's just a scene and after the scene, there's going to be a next scene and you know how these scenes usually play out. And you can stop the things that are happening on the screen and turn on the light and the movie theater, and disengage from that, and be nothing. And just be this unmoved observer, this is the first step, try to get hold of that state, you can use lucid dreaming states for that. There are certain schools of meditation that teach this under the guise of guides that are somewhat reliable, in the sense that they are in the history of a school that doesn't have bad outcomes. I think it's dangerous if you try to disassemble parts of yourself that are vital to your functioning. They, of course, many people also report that they are using psychedelic substances to get there, but they are, as far as I'm aware, for the most part illegal in the jurisdictions that I'm living in. So I would not recommend doing this. But large doses of psychedelic substances tend to temporarily induce derealization and depersonalization, which means there is no longer itself. And you'll get perspectives on reality outside of the perspective of itself.

Unknown 1:02:05
That's very distinct. And also ask us a question for itself is a source of man's problem. They think that,

Joscha Bach 1:02:12
of course, if you would not believe that you were an agent that needs to take care of reality, and of the many tasks that you have, you would not engage with that you do this, because you are wired to do so your drives are interfacing with itself in such a way that the agent becomes enslaved to the duties that the organism has for it. And if you free yourself from that you feel I don't have to care about any of this. Right? And if you feel that you don't have to care about anything in this world, you are ready to enter Nirvana, you're done. You've played through this game. And so you will not suffer when you don't care.

Unknown 1:02:50
Seriously, that what we need? And also have a question. To question left with this one. You your model of consciousness is the most impressive and convincing I have ever heard. However, the weak points seems to be the problem as qualia. Can you explain how qualia arises?

Joscha Bach 1:03:07
So qualia are the feature dimensions that the via singling out is our attention, they are the contents of the attentional model. And they get their meaning by the relationship to our global model of how everything works and state that everything is in right now. Which means general mental representations and the connections to them.

Unknown 1:03:31
However, question also, how relevant our hardware specification for continually learning system will classical microchips always suffice?

Joscha Bach 1:03:43
If you have enough of them, but it could be that the microchips that we are currently using to build models of the mind are not the optimal solution for this, it's probably possible to build hardware that is much more efficient at presenting the types of functions that our brain is representing, for instance, and everything in our own brain is a working according to a best effort paradigm. That means it's resilient against noise against random disturbances. And our transistors need to be pretty much completely deterministic, we are able to deal with a little bit of indeterminism by building error correction into our systems and our memories and so on. But we stack this error correction so much that we basically expect our computers to be 100% deterministic, which means that we can write symbolic software that runs exactly the same way on all computers. And we have a guarantee that the bits in the memory are basically never flipping and if we were able to build systems that are resilient against such changes and write software that is resilient against such changes in itself organizing to adapt to the substrate. If we could build hardware that is only using a tiny fraction of the power we could have powerful computers in our wristwatch that are only driven by body heat. And so we are basically not using the hardware in the best possible way. That's our current software paradigms.

Unknown 1:05:11
And also, question here is related, even given the equivalence of all the universal computer, it that, that, that bioengineering system and likeness of that brain is required to the most efficiently model cognition.

Joscha Bach 1:05:28
I think that you could, in principle, build a computer from arbitrary cells. So if you just use chemical messaging between adjacent cells, and you have multiple types of messages, and the cells can learn, and evolve mechanisms to control the flow of these messages, that in principle, this arrangement of cells if it's stable, and so on, and evolves together, and it's long enough, can turn into something that is effectively a brain. And it's probably is the case. So I suspect that all large cellular systems act like brains only much, much slower. The trick that the brain and animals is doing is that it's like a telegraph system that it can send information almost instantly over very large distances. And this makes it possible to move our skeletal muscles at the limit of physics as fast as we can accelerate these muscles and propel these bodies. But it's also very expensive, because the metabolism of this telegraph system is very expensive. And that's why our brain takes up so much energy. So because we need to send information over relatively large distances between a lot of cells very, very quickly device and plants, the dissemination of information between adjacent cells takes long and takes a longer time. So the life of plants or the experience of plants of the environment will take place in very different time spans. And in our digital computers, we can send information magnitudes faster, over larger distances and integrate over more positions in the memory that we can in a biological brain. So the biological brain is going to use certain tricks to make the synchronization happen. For instance, if you want to send information over large distances in the neocortex, it might take something like a few 100 milliseconds for the information to get there. But it needs to be there at the same time, right? So how can you make sure that the everything is synchronized, even though it's might be off by a third of a second. And the trick is that you rely on periodic processes, where everything is basically in a periodic update loop. And the content of this loop is only changing gradually. And because the content of the loop between now and 300 milliseconds, so now it will be almost the same, you just to make a need to make sure that all the parts of the neocortex that have connected representations are swinging at the same frequency. And so they can pretend that everything else is in that defined state. Right. And this is a very different way to propagate information, that we are using it right now in our literal computers. And the algorithms that will be implemented on this are very, very different representations will work in a different way. So it's, it's hard to wrap your mind around a general paradigm that would encompass both so in which they are the models that the brain is making of reality. And the models that our digital computers are computing on CPUs equivalent. And the thing is that every substrate will have an optimal way of representing the same functions. And they will be in some sense the same functions because we need to make sense of the same reality even though it happens because the different entanglement and the different timescales.

Unknown 1:08:46
We'll ask a question from the audience. What is the relationship between called mythological Work and Social Science and the modeling of complex social system? Machine learning model needs a lot of data and it's for graphics and take years to write how does meaning come into the picture, there is a limitation here.

Joscha Bach 1:09:06
For the current systems, are extremely limited, and for the same reason that mathematics is very limited at describing reality. Let's because these formal models that we develop as mathematical tools don't capture the exponential reality that we are in, they can only capture toy universes. So we try to construct toy universes, little abstract worlds, that are similar to our real world. In some sense, we make abstractions of the financial markets, we make abstractions of macro economic circumstances, we make abstractions of the human psyche or metabolism. And then we interact with these abstractions and hope that they hold and the abstractions that people have reality are very simplistic when it comes to social reality. There is also this big issue that the social sciences have failed. They don't produce for the most part models of society as it is, and instead they are are being taken over by activism, which is mostly exploring how society should be. And the delta between what they perceive as what existing and what is instead of how it actually works. And I think this is very dangerous, because it does not allow us to understand the state that we are in imagine you would be doing this to your own psyche, you never model yourself as who you actually are and how you actually work. But in an aspirational sense of who you should be. And only the difference between who you are and the depraved and unsatisfying state in which you currently are, is being looked at, that would make it impossible for you to understand not only the way in which you are, but also the way in which you can possibly be you're going to have a dysfunctional regulation. And I think that's the reason why there are so few sociologists and government.

Unknown 1:10:53
Yeah, yeah, that's true. That's also interesting point. So political to me, I have few questions. The first thing was of that experience in the way you're trying to think there's something still hard to understand for you when it comes to maybe because you have interest in how things work for brain and how safe that's so there's something for us to help we be counter intuitive. When you leave me when you were younger, you said that something should be be working that way or should be. But it was counter to it, or surprisingly, something is too hard to understand. I don't know what what kinds of things still, in your minds just how to have this happening. I cannot stand.

Joscha Bach 1:11:32
So there are many things that I don't know. And most of them feels that I don't know, the details. And these details are usually important. So I don't really know whether any system that is capable of complex information processing and has agency is going to form a model of attention that gives rise to consciousness, or whether you need to put specific things into that system. And I don't know what they are. A similar question is about language, what is necessary to form linguistic abstractions. And what is the state of these linguistic abstractions finds, it seems that in our own individual development, most people don't remember things from early childhood. And that's not because we don't form memories. At that time, you will notice that between, for instance, six months and one year children for memories, and they can refer to those memories. And then suddenly, when they are one and a half, or two or three, every organization takes place, and they will not be able to remember most of the things that happened before that we organization. And I suspect it happens when the linguistic mind takes over. And restructures the memories and the self. So the nexus of information retrieval might be a different one in the brain. And they don't fully understand how that works. And if it works the same way in other people, because there are some people which can retrieve early childhood memories. Does this mean that they itself is constituted in different way, they also people, which, for the most part, don't think linguistically. So they are not like me focused on this conceptual linguistic mind and think and concepts and consult perception when they need it. But some people do it the other way around there are in this intuitive perception mode all the time, and turn on the conceptual and linguistic mind when they need it. And this leads to a different organization, and very curious about how that works. But these are detailed questions, right? So it's, there is no big mystery that needs to be unraveled. But there are many, many practical questions that that are very tricky, and they don't know how to resolve.

Unknown 1:13:41
Right? And what can be the most important quality and have gained so far, and you think you have to maintain for your way of thinking, what is it important called this belief you have to have, maintain it for yourself? Yeah.

Joscha Bach 1:13:55
Resilience, you have to be able to deal with what life throws at you and be able to maintain a healthy relationship to your friends, your loved ones, and yourself. And this can be hard because life is a tough battle for every one of us. And we live in a world that has, in some sense, lost its belief in having a future. And to construct meaning and such a vote and sustainable relationships to others is difficult. And we have to deal with this difficulty. We have to understand the conditions under which we exist and how to develop integrity under these conditions. And then from this stance on this integrity, build our relationships to the environment and make them sustainable, and that is ultimately the most important thing that you have interesting scientific ideas is for the most part, not very important. Being a scientist, in some sense, is presented as a lifestyle archetype. Because scientists are people that tend to pay their bills on times and make good tenants because they make sure that the rats don't eat other books, and they don't kicked out by doing their studies. But by and large, a scientist is a human failure mode. It's a true scientist is born when a child decides to permanently trust their reason more than their intuitions. And when you trust your reason more than your emotions, that's a trauma mode, right? It means that you are unable to use your instincts to negotiate your relationship to your environment. And if you are permanently in that mode, you might be very useful for society in certain niche regions. But for yourself, that is typically a struggle and becoming aware of what motivates you as a scientist. And to be a good scientist, you have to be in that mode, right? You cannot rely on your intuition and use empathy to form your beliefs. You have to serve a true Scot and not a social, right, wrong God. That do you have to live with that tension?

Unknown 1:15:53
That's very, very wonderful. Do you think lastly, maybe I asked girls for advice video is life changing? If you want, like I said, That was okay. But I think it is based on the way you think, is giving you advantage how you understand people as well. Or maybe, like Namic flyfour, the meaning of why we're here, what are we doing? Do you think that's gives you? I don't know, what else do you have for yourself? Is it something maybe gives you leverage to, to deal with people understand better, they each have to

Joscha Bach 1:16:26
think that it gives me advantages and disadvantages. Basically, I have started as a young child to Project Reality on my own surface. And to become aware of how I do this because it didn't sync up with the way in which people around me constructed reality in communist Eastern Germany, for instance, and later on in consumerist, America, or in Western Germany, the fictions that people create the collective fictions in which they live didn't make sense to me. So I had to deconstruct them and understand how they worked and how to interface with them. And that is, in some sense, a drawback, because it creates a burden on you, because you'll always need to translate, and other people think something, what does this mean to them. And so when they say these words that mean different things, that the same words mean to you, these concepts that they're using are different. And the benefit that this has is that I can translate my ideas, I can, because I'm forced to translate them to myself and others, I feel that I'm very, very stupid. Ultimately, I can do only very little, and is ability to see the world from the perspective of a person that is too stupid, and limited to interface with society and the world as it is in the social domain as it is in the beliefs of other people as they are, but has to make these translations. This is creates a benefit because I'm able to formulate ideas clearly.

Unknown 1:17:48
So thanks so much. I think that was very inspiring. And you're really blunt. I think that's what's really a lot of thinking about what you said and thank you so much for having me on the podcast was a great pleasure to have you.

Joscha Bach 1:18:00
Thank you. Thank you is it was great pleasure to participate

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai