Joscha Bach 0:05
Okay

Joscha Bach 0:17
shall we get started?

Unknown 0:18
Yes, yes. Okay, go ahead.

Joscha Bach 0:24
I'm your Chava. I'm going to share my screen. Today we're going to talk a little bit about the idea of artificial intelligence and the work that I'm doing in this area, and some of the philosophy that goes into it. We will have a few short presentations on slides and in between you and me, and all of us have the opportunity to ask questions, discuss and see where this conversation leads us.

Joscha Bach 1:02
This is where my own journey started. This is, planes it's the place that I grew up in. It was in Eastern Germany during the time of communism. And it was a place that was very far from everything. And to me, this is the starting point of the universe. This is in some sense, where I woke up and everything that exists in the universe, is explaining this place, and US leading away from this place. It's basically the normal equilibrium point. For me, this is normal. And it's a world that a lot of people will find strange, it's full of art and sculptures and weird things, and so on. And so when I came in the outside world, I found the outside world to be totally strange, I didn't understand why people lived in extremely small boxes, and why they believed in weird things that were not true, and why my teachers had weird ideas about everything. And it was very strange. So I really tried to figure out what was going on. These were my parents. And the right one is me, the left one is my sister. And the other side of me, you see our cat, which is a very smart and friendly cat. And this is, maybe at your age, something like this. And roughly around this age, I had this thing on the right, which was a Commodore 64. It was a computer that you could buy, for use at home and program. And I learned how to program on this thing. And at some point, I realized that everything that I can imagine I can if I can really, really imagine it in all detail I can put in there and make it display things on the screen. And in some sense, the world is also like a screen, everything that I see on my retina is in my eyes and so on is in some sense, like a screen. And so what is generating the programs on the other side of that screen, what program runs the universe, and also if I fully understand everything, and I can program everything, and I had a computer that is large enough, what would I want to put in there? And the answer to me was pretty obvious I would would want to put in the entire world and there was minds to talk to. So I decided to study and go to academia to find out how to do this, how to build a mind and how to understand how we ourselves works. Our world works. And this was Humboldt University in Berlin, the first University where I studied, and this was back in the old days before you had to decide on on a particular subject and could not study anything else. So I studied everything that I wanted. I studied computer science and philosophy and physics and psychology, and a few other things. And I only did exams where I needed to for my degree. But I learned so much during that time. And then I was super lucky. I always wanted to spend some time in New Zealand because I saw that's the beauty most beautiful country in the world. So I went there. And at this, this University of Waikato and I met a very interesting professor there, Ian Witten, who had thought very deeply about text compression. And I only took this class very reluctantly, because I thought text compression, like making texts, water. This is a very boring subject, but I realized it was the best class I could take at this university. So that's why I took it, it was just the most challenging thing on offer mathematically and so on was challenging. And I learned that compression is in some sense about predicting the future. It's when you want to compress something, you only need to say what you don't already know, the information is about the things that you don't already know. If you already know everything, you don't need to remember everything. You don't need to do any work anymore, right? So in some sense, the idea is you observe everything that you can, and then you find the structure in it. And then you use the structure to predict what's going to happen next and you only have to encode the difference. You're the only thing that you have to remember that you have only have to code the difference with the things that you cannot or already predict. And this with so much in common with our our own mind works. And I realized this is one of the most fundamental principles of how our mind works or tries to predict things. And we have only to take care of the things that we cannot already predict, right. So predict as much as possible as well as possible, seems to be some fundamental principle. Then I worked in Berlin again and taught classes in Osnabruck, about cognitive science. And then I got the chance to go to the US and I went to MIT for a while, and taught a class on the future of artificial intelligence. And the things that still interests me most as

Joscha Bach 5:41
some before basic questions, in some sense, what is going on? What's What's the case in the world? How does the world work? What can I know about this in the first place? What am I? So how do I work? What what kind of system is also possible that I'm conscious? And what are the things that I should be doing as well? And these are the basically the four fundamental questions of philosophy. The first one is called ontologies. What's what's going on? What are the things in the world? What can I know is called epistemology? What am I missing, I think philosophy of mind. And the last one is ethics, right? Ethics is the question of what we should be doing how we should be living in groups together. And I think that ethics can best be understood by trying to become everyone and everything and see the world from all these perspectives at once. And then try to find a negotiation between all these different things wherever you are everyone to figure out how to get along. And it's very, very overwhelming when you try to take this perspective and discover a structure in which everything can work out for us. But it also means that we have to understand what we are and how we are related to the universe, and how the universe works, and what's possible in this universe. So all these questions are completely interlinked. And the question are the ways to find out how these things work? Could they sometimes called intellectual tradition, so it's basically groups of people that develop ideas and pass them on to each other from generation to generation. And philosophy is the land of all the theories that that could exist. And it starts out with our human understanding that that we get when we are born in our starting place, and from our actions, other people, and we try to gradually reverse engineer that, so we take it apart, and we see what's true and, and use logic to it and use our natural language and more stricter ways. Until we figure things out. And the things that we figure out, mostly discussions and arguments, you pass on to the next generation. And mathematics starts from the other direction, it's the land of all the languages that could be. And it starts out with the most simple languages that are rich with logic and numbers, and formula, ideas of shape and space, and so on. And you try to put them together until we can see things that are true. And mathematics, because it's using all these formal languages where we know about everything is doing something, it's very hard to say something meaningful about the real world in mathematics, we can say something about a particular parts of mathematics, if you already fully understand like space. But is this the space that you live in? Is this the world that you live in, you can talk about numbers, but are these numbers really the things that we experience, it's very hard to make that connection eventually. So we basically need to make a link between philosophy and mathematics. And philosophy is the same problem from the other direction, because it's starts with natural language. And almost everything in philosophy is natural language. And natural language is very vague, and uncertain, and so on. It's often very hard to decide whether what you say in philosophy is true. Right. So we need to meet at some point mathematics and philosophy, I think. And none of the question is does mathematics really, really work at all to explain everything. And there was a long discussion about this land of the mathematicians. And there was a discussion that started with theory of sets. Maybe some of you know about this, when you had basic mathematics already. And it has to do with the infinities. That is when you assume that there are infinitely many things, you often run into contradictions in mathematics. And so the mathematicians decided that they want to make really fix the Foundations of Mathematics to make sure that everything works out. And that century, mathematician named, quote guru discovered that there is something like back in mathematics, you cannot really build a computer in mathematics, that that doesn't crash when it tries to run some of the Pirates of mathematics, but it's like a back in the programming languages of mathematics. You can think of mathematics like a code base, like a big collection of computer programs that help you call to compute things to figure things out, and they all fit together. And the physicists are borrowing these quotes from mathematics and using to think about the universe and so on. The economists are borrowing this from mathematics to think about value and so on, and the economies of countries. So it's very serious if there are parts of mathematics that might crash, right? So

Joscha Bach 10:14
Alan Turing discovered that there is a way out. And he discovered that you can, there's a subset of mathematics a part of mathematics that you can always calculate. And this is computation, it's the things that can run in a computer. And he also discovered that all computers have the same power, the only difference between the power that they have is how much memory they have, and how fast they are, and how good the graphics and sound capabilities of them are. But the kinds of programs that they can run are the same, which means you can make one computer in another computer, for instance, you can take my Commodore 64. And you can write an emulator, which is a program that behaves exactly as it does, and run it on a Mac or on a PC or a supercomputer. And you can run all the games of the Commodore 64, it also works the other way around, you can write a program that runs on a Commodore 64. And they can can run a Mac and run all the problems of the Mac on the Commodore 64. And practice, it doesn't work because the Commodore 64 has to do with memory. So we would need to add much, much, much more memory. And it also would be very slow. But in principle, all the computers have the same power. And everything that is can be described by going from state to another state in a way that is not completely random, can be described by this principle by computation. So are our minds computers? Are they working like computers? Can we make an emulation of a computer? Off the computer that is our mind and run it on a computer? And how could we do this? This was the big question which was born by Turing. And maybe it's a little bit older than that already. But he was the one who asked it that in 50, in a very concrete way, there was a philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, in the early 1920s. And he said, Let's make a computer language that can do philosophy. So let's make a language where we agree on what all the words mean, and make it really, really strict, and so like fetal mathematics, and so we should be able to do philosophy in it and understand the world visit. And at the end of his life, he thought about, there was a very good idea. But I have big trouble to understand how to describe meaning is a computer program and images and reality and so on. And this is something that computer science is only now starting to wrap its mind around in Turing had this idea of making a test, can you make a computer program that passes as human like intelligence? And he said, that maybe the way to do this is to just talk to it and ask it, for instance, to write a poem and then ask it to make the poem slightly different? And then ask it why did you make the poem slightly different? And what would be the best ways to do this, and if it is able to explain to you everything that it's doing, and the same way, as human beings are doing it, we should treat it as intelligent. So how can we capture this notion of intelligence, what it's like to be a human. And what I distinguish is, first of all, the mind. And to me, a mind is a system that is generally intelligence with some kind of Universal Intelligence. And being intelligent is it's when you can make models of things. So when you can understand how things are related to each other how information how differences are related to other differences, and how things shape up to be. And the models that we make, they help us to make the right decisions, and movements, it doesn't mean that when you are very intelligent that you always make the right decisions, it means you are very good at making models, right? There are many, many super smart people that are super good at making models, but they don't have them very much. Because they are not wise. They don't make the right decisions. Wisdom is about picking the right goals. And so you also need to make models on this level, what are you and what do you want, what should you should be doing. And it's not necessarily that the system is intelligent in the same way as it knows what it's doing. There are narrow artificial intelligence networks, artificial intelligence can usually walk to one thing very well like playing chess very well. And a chess computer can beat a human being. But it can only do this one thing and drive a car. And there are computers built in into self driving cars, and they can somewhat decently drive a car. Sometimes they make mistakes that they shouldn't be doing. Because they cannot understand everything in the world yet. But they can only do this one thing that it's programmed for, and it's trained for and so on. And a general artificial intelligence. Universal Intelligence can solve all the important question what's going on around me? What kind of know about these things? What am i What's my relationship to the world around me? And what should I be doing in every moment based on this? And I call this ability to understand what You're doing sentience. So sentience is about having an inner world that explains what's happening next in the universe. And it has a good model of who you are. And the sentient system knows what it's doing.

Joscha Bach 15:14
Could yourself as yourself a cat's sentient in the sense that let's look at this. Maybe some of you have seen this, it was on the internet last year. So you see this toddler, the toddler got out of it seed, and now climbing and what you cannot see is your stairs now very, very steep and the cat is coming. And it's attacking the toddler to go back into its room. Right? You can see it in slow motion, but toddlers trying to climb down the stairs. And the cat is pushing the toddler back into the room. And it's very, very steep, dangerous, concrete stairs. So if the toddler would fall down, it would hurt himself and maybe die and so on. And the kid is jumping up and understands that the toddler cannot decide whether it's safe or not. And that kid understands if the toddler needs to be protected, right, so it's helping the baby to not fall down there. The baby understands its place in the family, right, the baby cannot, the cat understands is much, much better than the baby does. The baby has much larger brain than the cat. But the cat understands its relationship to the universe, it understands that it can attack the baby with alternative, the baby can attack the baby to prevent the baby from getting hurt. It's a very, very smart kid. So I would say the cat is definitely sentient. This is a picture of the same cat. And so you can see it's a it's a very smart one, it really knows what it's doing. But of course, cats are not generally intelligent, a cat cannot learn how to play chess, even if you explain a lot. For instance, a cat doesn't have the same kind of language, you cannot learn grammar and so on limits to what a cat can learn. But the cat really understands its relationship to the world, at a deeper level, as at most children do, their most children do. And, of course, people can get much smarter and more sentient awake than cats at some point. But don't underestimate cats. So a generally intelligent agent, some being that is able to make models about everything is sentient. And it can explain how it works. Cat does know how it works. And we humans also don't really know how we work, we have an idea. But it's a very shallow idea. And I think that artificial intelligence is the best way to build a theory and test it on how we work. And so before we can build such a general intelligence, we don't know whether we are really generally intelligent or whether people in some sense are cats that have learned many, many things. And evolution has given us the right ideas on where to start and look for these things. But maybe we are not generally intelligent, maybe there are things that we can really not learn. As we are not the only intelligent beings on the planet. Now our mind is the thing that observes the world. And this is our mind is made from neurons and neurotransmitters. They're like little switches in our body, that are responsible for sending information around like a telegraph network. And this is how our mind is, is implemented, how it's being built. And our working memory tells us what's current in this moment. So when you perceive this, me talking to you, you see a scene in your mind, right you see reality. And this reality is held in your working memory, it determines the present state of the world now, that what is here, what you can see, and yourself is your model of who you are. And your consciousness, this is what you experience. This is what you can feel in every moment and how you can reflect on every moment that you're aware of the fact that you are aware and so on. And these things also do not just exist in the human mind, they also exist in the entire civilization and the entire society and all of humans together, they have something like this together.

Joscha Bach 18:54
Society observes the world, and people is how the society is implemented, how it's being made. And our generation is what is current and about. And our culture is who we are this basically like our the self of our civilization. And our media is the consciousness of our civilization. It's how we exchange our ideas and our experiences, and what is important to us and so on, and what we are aware of, and so it gives the reflection to our society. And so in some sense, our civilization, all of humanity together, it's like a giant brain. And that brain made for people. And that brain forms the mind, which is the society number generation is the working memory of that society. And the culture is in some sense, the operating system and the self model of the society and the media. It's the space where we have our spotlight where we are aware of things and exchange ideas. And arguably, we are a very immature brain as a society. It's like our media is very confused and very chattering as basically He's like having attention deficit in autism, and seizures or events. And if we can get our society to become coherent, wake up into something that knows what it's doing and to become sentient, then we might have a long term perspective on this planet. And I think that's part of our job is to try to make society more coherent, and more sentient and more intelligent and more of advice, and pick the right goals. So, in some sense, this idea to have a society that is social, social mind, that is completely coherent. It was the idea of a tower of Babel, it was the idea to basically put all the sciences together in one single coherent thing that reaches from the earth, into the heavens into the realms of ideas, and thoughts and so on. And this thing fell apart, because people started to talk in languages that they couldn't understand each other. So the biologists talked in languages that the British ones could no longer understand the mathematicians talked in languages, that philosophers no longer understood the economist talk and language that the sociologists no longer understood. And so in some sense, the entire building of our science and so on, fell apart. And as a result, when this fell apart, the Dark Age started, and people started to believe in mythology. And they thought that the mythology is literally true. And they didn't know what no longer how to tell truth from lies. And for 1000s of years, people were very stupid and confused about things. And we are, in some sense, still suffering from that. So this is part one, and I prepared the second part in which I talk a little bit about how our mind works and construct reality. It's all from a very, very basic, fundamental perspective. But I suggest that we make small break now and take some questions and discuss and see where this leads us.

Unknown 21:57
So everyone, please feel free to ask questions, either in chat, or you can ask me to unmute you, and you can talk, whatever you prefer. Just raise the hand, the electronic one, because I can see you if your camera is off.

Unknown 22:24
So the first question you have here, Yoshi is what made you study AI.

Joscha Bach 22:31
was mostly that I thought, this world is very dear to me. How is it possible that I wake up in basically a monkey body? And how is it possible that society is severe? And why is it that other people don't make sense to me? And I thought I need to figure out what's going on? And so how can I figure out what's going on, I have to figure out how to make sense of things. And I thought that, okay, there must be a general way to get to the root of these things. And the best way to understand for instance, how my own mind works in the mind of other people works, is to study its structure, how it's being made up. And so I looked into brains, and I looked into philosophy. And I realized that most of the things that people discussed over the centuries didn't really help me to find an answer. So I need to look at, it's at the boundary of our current knowledge. And the boundary of current knowledge of how the mind works, is this idea that we can make a model of the mind in a computer and test it. This is artificial intelligence. And so I thought this is the most interesting. And also the most important question there is, maybe we cannot figure out it out in our lifetime, because people have been trying for 1000s of years in a way. But really, it's the most interesting question. Also, if you can build a mind, then you can make it smarter than a human being, you can scale it up. And you can use it to solve any kind of problem in the world you can make make a better government, for instance. And you can also understand how information processing works in the world at large, you can understand the way societies work because they are, in some sense, also artificial intelligences that we built. And we haven't thought about them very systematically. But if you think about this, from the way there is a similarity between the society and our own mind, in our own head, the different parts of our mind that fit fit together and talk to each other in the way that for instance, a company or school works for everybody talks to each other needs to figure out how to relate to each other, and just society works. These are all in some sense, the same principles at different scales. So I think that AI can teach us something about all of them.

Unknown 24:36
We have a lot of questions here. One is what are the downsides of AI?

Joscha Bach 24:43
Well, we don't know yet because we don't have one. The downside could be that we could build a system that is smarter than us. And if you can build a system that can outsmart us, and that is more powerful than us and then ask the question, does it want something different that we don't want? Can we still control it? That's that's an open question, right? So what would happen if, for instance, if you built an AI government and the government doesn't like people very much and says there should be way fewer people? Or if it, what happens if you make an AI and give it a company and the AI turns out to be insane at some level, and just tries to make money, instead of looking at weather destroys the environment, and we don't know how to fix it any more, because we started, we can no longer stop it. Right? So this is a different question, or what happens if you give everybody an AI, and some people decide to do something really dangerous visit? Or what happens if lots and lots of people get unemployed, and B are too stupid to give, find something new to do for them, and they get bored, and they are worse, because people get bored and just fight against each other? If you don't really know what's going to happen. So these are possible downsides. Arguably, many of these problems can be solved if we are smarter and more intelligent and understand better how we work. So unbalanced, I think we should do it. The other thing is, we cannot stop it from being done. Because it's so important, right? So even if if lots of people will decide not to do it, somebody else will do it.

Unknown 26:11
So people ask, is it possible to build a self sufficient AI that could live by itself?

Joscha Bach 26:22
So, yes, I think in some sense, this has already happened, you could think of everything that is alive is not so different from an AI, it's not built by a human being, it's built by an evolutionary process. It's all made from cells. And the cell is a small robot, with a small factory built in and power plant to make energy. And the factory can reproduce everything in the cell, including the complete set. And the factory has a small computer built into it with some kind of a tape the DNA, and the computer has the operating system of the cell. And the cell can divide itself and the first cell has never died, every cell in your body is a copy of the first cell just split off on the first cell. And so you could think of everything that is alive on Earth is a giant, self sufficient AI, that is running itself. And even if you throw immediate on this planet, not all the cells are going to die, it's almost impossible to kill life, once you have it. So before the earth loses the atmosphere and about a billion years, life is not going to end. And it's completely self sufficient. In a way it doesn't need anything else. But sunlight.

Unknown 27:30
People ask what would be the boundary between AI and life, if we go further with AI?

Joscha Bach 27:37
That depends on how you define life. And when the biologists started to have their field, they didn't know how to define life, they just pointed at living things and adapt things. And I knew that there was a difference. But they didn't know exactly what the difference was. So they thought maybe there is some kind of life force that needs to be in things. And I think now the definition of life is basically itself. So everything that is made from cells is alive, as long as the cells are functioning. And when those cells are no longer alive, then you don't have life anymore. And for instance, a virus, which is less than a cell, it's just basically a bit of programming code, like a computer virus, that the cell cannot help but read. And when the cell reads this programming code, it starts to make things in its factories that are not good for the cell for the organism. But that only reproduce this code with some little bit of hardware that runs around and infect other cells. The virus is not yet alive. It's it's almost life, but not yet. It's only a part that uses the existing life. But life in some sense, is the minimal molecule, super molecule that is able to reproduce itself and adapt itself to an environment. So this is what how you could define it. And so I would say that, if we teach the rocks how to think if we build computers that can think they're probably not alive in the same way. It could be also that there are things in the universe which are intelligent and which are not made for themselves. Maybe there is somewhere a super gas giant that is like Jupiter, and the clouds have magnetic storms. And some of the clouds are have metals in them. So the rector for into the storms, and maybe it can make storms to move the clouds in certain ways. Maybe you can learn to think if you give it long enough time, maybe there are things in the universe, which can think in a way and they're not alive. And the computers that we would do that, if they're able to think they I don't think that they're alive in the sense, but they can be autonomous and they can be self sufficient, and they can make many of the properties of life. And it's don't think that they will be able to replace life because life is basically a cell is so robust and so optimal. It's so small at scale. So you can probably not make something that is smaller than a cell that can do the things that cells do. So in life might already be in some sense, optimal for certain things. But so I would think that artificial intelligence systems even if they're smarter than life forms that coexist with life they will are completely eradicated and vice versa.

Unknown 30:03
So there were some questions about AI in space. Can we make AI cell fixing, so we could send it to other solar systems without worrying about system failing?

Joscha Bach 30:19
Yes, I think that if you want to make an AI that is working really, really well, we don't need to think about how to build the algorithm directly and make a computer that is only working when it's perfectly in order. But we probably need to make a system that can deal with failure. And that is able to repair everything and grow, it's everything into the structure. So maybe AI has to be grown instead of being built. And to grow, it has to be able to grow itself. So it needs to have some basic core that is always functional. Or if it's large enough, it's going to figure itself out and understand what it's doing. And then it understands how to extend itself and how to repair itself and how to find new parts to add to itself and expand into those parts. So it's more like growing like a forest, or like an organism, like a tree that is a seedling and it takes an environment like the earth around the seedling of the tree, and then turns it into its own structure. And if you can build a system like this, it's probably going to be robust enough to do this failure. Another way to do it would be to build in many more molecules that you would just send into space. And then when it's launching on the other planet, it's trying to find raw materials and assemble them into something that they can use and terraform the planet and then become intelligent and Bootstrap itself. And the minimal mechanism for doing this is to sell. So maybe the cell itself isn't AI that something has built to as a self sufficient AI to send it around in space. You don't know how the first cell emerged on Earth, maybe it appeared randomly, and maybe something has centered? Who knows?

Unknown 31:58
People ask how is it even possible to build a mind if scientists and philosophers don't yet understand what the mind is?

Joscha Bach 32:09
I, when I was a child, I thought that the people around me, and also the scientists and philosophers that taught me at school and so on, were either lying or confused. And it's still a very good theory, most people really don't know what they're doing. And basically, to understand things like how our mind works, you need to you need to be not confused for like 1000 years. And most of the time, civilizations get confused before that, because there's some kind of revolution and the universities are burned down, libraries get lost, and so on. And so we have to sit down back again and piece it back together. And often people have mistakes and how to piecing it back together. And I think that every generation, there are a few 1000 people that try to go to the foundations, and then back to the edges and try to make things work to to figure things out. And once you figure things out, you will go back in history, and you will read the books that other people wrote at different times. And most of the important ideas, I think, have been understood at different times already. And so this idea of what a mind is, I think has been discovered many, many times in human history by different people. But you are the first industrial civilization as far as we know, we are the first civilization that can build giant machines at scale from very, very tiny parts. And so we have not started with this very long ago, our civilization is only like 400 years old when we basically overcome the Christian civilization and no longer believed in the mythology of the Christians, and started fresh with the enlightenment. And so we had to rediscover the ideas that existed before the churches have absorbed these ideas for us and made it hard for us to think about them. 400 years is not that long. But we have made a lot of progress. And it could be that we are going to figure out things in this next century. It could also be that next century, global warming comes and makes it so hard for us to have universities and have thinking and libraries and so on. People are more concerned with survival, that our research is stopping maybe forever, oh for a while. But I think if our civilization goes on, and you can continue our research, it's very likely that we're going to figure it out.

Unknown 34:22
So I guess, asks, is there a way to program AI to have emotions?

Joscha Bach 34:28
Yes, I think so. That's most of my research is about what is in emotion. So I think an emotion is a way that you relate to the world it hangs on the perception that you have like color hangs on the objects you cannot really separate it, it's the way you perceive things. And then there is a feeling and the feeling is a way that in which you are perceptual mind the parts that processes images and space and so on, is relating to talking to the symbolic mind to the thing and you that can can do language and planning and programming and on. So this is a communication of this of the emotional assessment of the way you relate to the world. And it's important to realize that we don't live in the physical world, our own mind, our own perception exists in a dream, we dream reality. And our brain is in some sense, our mind is producing a dream. In the physical world, there are no colors and no sounds. In the physical world, there is only some quantum stuff that we don't properly understand yet. But we know that it's producing patterns. And our brain is using things like sounds and colors, and people and ideas and so on, to predict these patterns to make sense of them. And they are generated in your own mind the same parts of your brain that make dreams during the night, make them during the day. And during the day, these dreams, basically track the patterns that you perceive. And so we live inside of this multimedia story of the movie that your brain is making. And so to make something that feels we have to build a computer program that is producing a similar dream, and in this dream, there's going to be a person self that experiences that dream. And it's all virtual. It's all only in this simulation. And so every one of us lives in a simulation that is made by our brain.

Unknown 36:13
Sheila asks, What if consciousness is a bad thing?

Joscha Bach 36:21
What would it mean for consciousness to be bad? And good?

Unknown 36:26
Shiva? You can unmute yourself, surely, she says warping our understanding?

Joscha Bach 36:39
That's a very interesting question. I think that consciousness is our model of what we attend to. So it's basically the model of our attention. It's, it's keeping track of what we are fixating at any given moment, most of the things that happen, our mind are not conscious, they are outside of our attention. So we don't remember that we are not aware of them. And so I sometimes think of our mind, like an orchestra where there are 50 instruments, each of them is a brain area. And some of these instruments are being played to make the music of vision and some of them the music of touch, and some of them put them together, and so on, some of them make decisions. And the whole thing is, as an conductor, and the conductor is like the conductor in an orchestra. It's not that the conductor doesn't make the music, the conductor decides what's being played. And it resolves conflicts, and it tells different instruments when they don't play very well how to play better. So it's focusing on parts of that orchestra, and tells the single instrument or a couple of instruments, how to play together better, or how to improve their own performance. And so it gives the direction to the whole thing. And I think that's the purpose of our consciousness. And if you think that the conductor is making the music, then this will be a bad thing, because the conductor isn't making it right. It's only the direction of the music, and it's a small part of the whole ensemble. But it's a very vital part for the way our particular kind of mine to set up, I think it's conceivable, to have a mind that is doesn't have consciousness, in a sense, it doesn't have the spotlight of attention, but where everything is done in the same way in this conscious and unconscious in the same way. There is another aspect to consciousness which is related to suffering. Because only if you are able to attend to pain, you can experience suffering, right. So a non conscious system cannot suffer if you turn off consciousness, the remaining system is no longer suffering. So if we want to make surgery on somebody, we turn off their consciousness. And if we cut them open to repair the organs, they will not suffer. But consciousness is also the thing that can resolve suffering. By becoming aware of how things truly work and what we need to be worried about and what not. In some sense, we can change our own programming code, because our consciousness if you've trained it really well, and reduce suffering, but in a sense, everything that is experienced is bad requires a consciousness to experience as at such, so you could say that consciousness is bad, or if all Consciousness in the Universe would end, everything that is bad would end, but also everything that is good would end. So it's a hard deal to decide whether it's a good thing or not.

Unknown 39:14
So do we want to move to the next part of the day one.

Joscha Bach 39:20
We can also have some more questions at the end of the next part. So what's going on? I never woke up, I realized I'm standing on some kind of planet and there are stars in the sky and the sun. And what's my relationship to this? I also have a mental model of that happens, right? So I know that I imagined myself seeing myself on this planet and scars in the sky and so on. And how are these two spheres related to each other? And the traditional answer that existed for this is called dualism. dualism means you have two worlds the world of Imagination and thought in the mind, and the physical world, and they coexist. And each of them has its own worlds, so to speak this basically the worlds of the mind, and the worlds of the physical world. And there's just two of them, the physical world has basically much, much more detail. And this the idea of dualism is that the physical world is simplified into the realm in the mental world. No, the idea of dualism is that they coexist. In some sense. There's the idea, the idealist model, the idea of this model says that we are living in a dream. So basically, everything is only in the mind, there's only Mind Consciousness is the most primary, the mind is primary. And the physical world is a dream that we are having, and our own mind and our own self. And our physical world itself is in a dream that is dreamt by a mind on a higher plane of existence, like a god or something like this. And then there is the idea of monist materialism. So it's, there's only also only one thing and the physical world is primary. So I'm standing in this physical world on a physical piece of rock that is trading through space, and then look at the moon and the sun, and the stars, and so on. And I'm having ideas that and these ideas are realized physically in my brain is a physical machinery. And most people in our civilization believe in this minus materialism. And in the previous civilization, people were dualist. And in many Eastern civilization, people were idealist. So they believe that there is only one thing which is the mind. And the duelist thinks as two things the mind and the world. And in oneness materialism, there's only the physical world, and the mind is generated by the physical world. And the perspective that I think how it really works is what I call functionalism, or computational functionalism. It's basically there is a mental world that looks like the physical world to us. And then there's a world of ideas that looks like the world of ideas to us. And they're both dreamt by a mind on a higher plane of existence. And that mind on the higher plane of existence is, is the true physical world that we can never get access to. It is this the thing that is out there, outside of your mind, outside of your dream, you can never get outside of the dream that you are locked in. But what you perceive right now, all the colors and sounds are all made by your own brain, all in this brain is the mind of the higher plane of existence. This is the God that creates the universe. And there are probably other brains like yours, and they interact in this physical world, and so on. But everything that we know about this is stuff that your own brain has figured out. Right? It's the discovery of your own brain, that there are other minds that have brains, and that the brain creates your mental representations of the physical world, and of the world of ideas.

Joscha Bach 42:54
So how does this work with, when we look at the brain, if you start out with the brainstem, that's the area that you didn't see down there that's connecting us to our body and has models of connections to our organs. And the part on top, that's the thalamus. And the thalamus is something like the phone switchboard of our brain, it's taking in data from your eyes, and from your ears and from your body surface, and from parts of the brain and distributes them throughout the brain so the brain can make sense of them. And this is the part of your brain that is responsible for generating pleasure and pain. That's the limbic system. And this is something some sense measuring your needs. So there are things that your organism needs, for instance, needs to eat, it needs to drink from time to time, it needs to rest, it needs to have connections to others, and so on. And when these things go wrong, you experience pain signals, and when they go right, they get you to get pleasure signals. And this pleasure and pain is directing our actions. And so I built a small machine that is a model of how our emotions work. It has lots and lots of things for all our needs, and they're connected to each other. And we can use this to build a small AI that is exploring the world and is in some sense, autonomous, that it doesn't need any human input to decide what it needs to do, because it has its own needs. And it gets pleasure and pain, depending on what it's doing in the world. And so it's learning things to satisfy its needs and to avoid the bad things happen to it like it gets hurt, and so on. So Christ will not do that. And the understanding of the world is what this thing is limited. So we understand the world much, much better. Another thing that's in this image of the world, this model of the world is generated in our neocortex. This is the large area that you see here. It's most of our brain is creating this simulated world. So it's important to realize that the world that we experience again, it's not the physical world. It's a simulation. It's like a game engine. So if you imagine that you will look at a game like Minecraft, or World of Warcraft or any kind of computer game that has ever about an avatar in it, this is something like the game engine, our own mind, this game engine, our own mind is being formed to predict the sensory data so that it's only electrical impulses coming in from the world, like so cables, from your retina, from your ears, and so on. And there's only patterns coming in there. And this game engine in your mind is tuned, it's to predict these patterns to make sense of them. And the program that comes up is to predict these patterns is what we experienced as the world. It's this game engine that you live in.

Joscha Bach 45:33
And it's all done by these guys, these are neurons, these are embryonal neurons, they haven't really connected up to each other yet. And initially, they they basically like little animals, little single celled animals, they crawl around, and they try to make friends and link up. And when they managed to link up in the right way, then they find sources of food. And they get rewarded, if they send signals at the right moment. So every neuron doesn't really know what it's doing. It's only trying to send signals at the right moment. And they're all locked up in the same skull in the same room. And they have to work together. And if the brain as a whole is sending signals at the right moment, then the whole brain gets fed by the organism, right. So they have to figure out how to cooperate. And they are put into an initial configuration by evolution. So the evolution tells humans how to link up, at first, roughly, in which order and then they figure out the details. It's like when you're born in a society, the society that you were born into, is not something that has been invented in this generation has been an evolution of societies. But for 1000s of years, our societies have optimized themselves into some kind of architecture, some kind of structure. And if you were born in society, you only have to find your local place like this individual neuron dies, and then you try to make local sense of the world and interact with other people. And as a result of this interaction, something emerges that has more intelligence than the individual parts. And I think what the individual neurons are doing can maybe be best understood like synthesizer. Some of you might know a synthesizer, it's an electronic circuit that can make sounds and music. And works by taking a number of electronic parts together, it can be quite a variety of parts that work for this, and the need to make observations that you can change. And you have a number of knobs to play around with. And each time you turn the knobs in a different direction, it makes a different sound. It's a very interesting thing to play with, you can buy one or you can buy, get a computer program that runs on your iPad that has a synthesizer in it or simulation of a synthesizer, you can make learn how to make any sound that you want with it. So if you figure out how to turn the knobs, and if you take a random arrangement of neurons and saw them together, and you see these individual neurons as knobs, so to speak, so you can stimulate and you can activate them a little bit, you can, the brain can learn how to get a collection of neurons to produce arbitrary patterns like sounds. And it can produce patterns to predict sensory data, it can predict these patterns that come in from your retina and from your ear, and so on. And once you find a way to make a bunch of neurons produce the right oscillations, you can stack them together. And then we make oscillators from oscillators and find meta patterns patterns on the next layer that you can organize. So you're not just making sounds, but you can also make simple melodies. And once you know how to make simple melodies, you can bet to the next there. And you can make them produce pieces of music, like a piece of dance, music, and so on. And if you look at the patterns between all the pieces of dance music, you understand the entire genre. And then you can make a pattern maker that understands types of music and can make new types of music maybe, right so this isn't a way I think how it works, it's stacking things. So what you see here.

Joscha Bach 49:47
You seen is a very interesting piece of music. It's a piece of music that has been designed to look exactly the same as the function that produces the music. It's basically the shape of the oscillators that make the music. And it's the rare intersection where sound and vision are exactly the same. It's basically, you can see that's a visual pattern, right. And the visual pattern is a two dimensional projection of a sound, a three dimensional projection if you take the time into regard. And so it's a sound that is exactly the same as what you can see. And somebody made an entire album with this kind of oscillator music. That is, has an identity between the images and the sound. And we have two sensory modalities. Here, a play visual system that is trying to find patterns in what you see. And the acoustic modality which takes tries to find patterns in what you hear. And as you could see, there are here the same. Normally, it doesn't really work like this, because the patterns that you can recognize in your vision are two different working at different timescales and in different dimensions than the patterns that you can discover in sound. They only meet at a much later point where you then normally where Sound and Vision meet is when you are looking at three dimensional objects that make noises, right, so when you can look around in the space, and you'll see that the same things that make sounds also look in a particular way, this is where they normally meet. And here, they found a way to merge these modalities much much earlier, it's a very interesting experiment to me. But more real sounds much, much more complicated than the ones that you can display like this, some people can see sounds, most people cannot, the ability to see sounds, or also to experience the visual qualities of say numbers and so on. It's called synesthesia, it's when you can get conscious access of how sound is being made in your brain. So for instance, some artists made this will he is the center set and he produced an animation in computer graphics. So you can see the way he is seeing sound. And also sometimes it sounds like this. See if it works.

Joscha Bach 52:53
And by the way, everything that you see here is mathematics, right? Mathematics is the only language in which you can talk about these shapes. Natural language is not sufficient to describe them well enough to understand these shapes, you need a language that has much much more detail and strictness in it. And this language allows you to talk about these shapes and construct them and to exchange ideas about them in more detail. And so I think that we teach mathematics, usually in school, and the wrong way, we teach it as doing accounting and a way of doing numbers for your tax returns. And this gets more and more extended until we get to the point where I have to write these numbers in Greek hieroglyphics. And nobody really understands them anymore. But I think that mathematics, it's, it's very different. It's more like music. And mathematics is about understanding the parts that your mind is already knowing how to do for the most part, and being able to talk about them in a language that allows you to reason about them and to make proofs and to extend the ways that our mind is working. Mathematics is basically a tool to make to help you think better, it's not about the notation, the notation is only helping you in the same way as donation of music can help you to talk about music, and to write it down and to make it better together with others. But in the same way, as music is not about notation, mathematics is not about making the notations mathematics is about a way of thinking. I wish I had known this in school, I learned it much too late. Okay, so we what I tried to show you is that you cannot only recognize patterns and sound with oscillators. But you can also recognize them in colors. And in shapes and so on. You can find them together and synthesizer is over many layers. And so if we combine the patterns and patterns, what you see to the left is the representation of sound. And speech is visual patterns. And we can combine them into percepts. And into dynamic animations. Basically find the patterns and the patterns until we get to something like a three dimensional world. And from the three dimensional world is moving you can abstract concepts, which are the objects that we observe in this three dimensional world, how they relate to each other. So this is how we make sense of the mental animations that we are seeing in our mental virtual reality. And then we have words, the words are not the same thing as the concepts, the words, our way to point at them. And to talk about them, the words have no similarity to the concepts. They are just like magic words that we can use to evoke like a magician, a simulation of our own mind, right. So when we say cloud, we can see a moving cloud in our own mind. It's a magic word. And we, the language is using these symbols, symbol cloud, to evoke the concept of the cloud. And the concept is like the pointer to this big library of little programs that your mind has learned. And when you call up this, like library of programs, it produces moving clouds in your mind. And the moving cloud is generally made from patterns that patterns are generated over sensory modalities over things that you have seen and heard before in the world. So I think this is how the physical world and the mental world and our experience of the mental world and the world of ideas are related to each other. Okay. I would suggest that we use the rest of the time for more questions and discussions.

Unknown 56:26
We actually got lots and lots of questions here. So let me get them. Second. So people say their mind blown, by the way. So there were some very interesting questions in the beginning

Unknown 56:55
of this section. What if I was trying to make computers have the same reality dream as us.

Joscha Bach 57:19
I think to have the same reality dream as us, they would need to work at the same time scale and get data of the patterns from the world at the same resolution. And from the same sources, imagine that you would make a thing that is 10 times faster than us or 100 times faster than us, it could see things that are like a blur for us, as things that are moving very, very slowly, and that have structure in them. So, for instance, vibrations would look very different to it. For us, for instance, a sound only starts at a frequency of say 50 hertz, which means, for instance, if you take a ruler, and you make that rule of flop, consuming this linearity, testing, testing, so a ruler like this, and you make it flop like this, right, this is not swinging fast enough to make a sound. And if you put this to your table, like this

Joscha Bach 58:17
starts to make a sound that you can hear, and starts, but at roughly 50 times a second, your face starts to produce the sound, you can you no longer can resolve the individual tics, the tics basically blend together in one thing. And the highest frequency that you can hear, if you're a baby is about 20,000 times take in a second, and you can no longer hear it. It's altra sound, and only dogs and beds can hear it. And if you're an adult like me, you can hear maybe 10,000 of these vibrations per second. And if you get even older, then maybe it's only 5000. And so the older you get, the fewer of these vibrations, you can still hear and integrate. But if you are a computer that has very fast sound processor, it would be able to hear sounds in a much, much higher range. And it would also be able to take the sound apart at a level that we cannot. So it could process the individual parts of a sound at a level that we cannot solve, it would experience things in there that we cannot see. Another thing is colors. For instance, we only have three types of color receptors in our retina. And these three types of color receptors give rise to a space of many, many millions of colors. But still, there's only three dimensions in this space. There's basically a redness dimension, and the greenness dimension, and a blueness Darmok dimension. And everything that you see is made from these three dimensions. And there are a few people in the world which are called tetrax robots. All of them are women, as far as I know. And they seem to have four types of color receptors, and they can see an entire dimension of color. So it's not like they have one more color. Every color can be different for them as well. lots of lots of shapes and shapes in it. And these people basically see a much, much richer world than the rest of the world. And they cannot really talk with the others about these new colors that they see because they're not enough people to agree on names for these color bars. But for them, if they look at colors that other people think, Oh, these go very well together, they might feel no, they're actually a mismatch, they don't really fit together very well, because they're too different. And if they look on images on a computer screen that is designed for normal vision, they will find that the colors are weird, and often they don't really look like the colors that they can see. For them, this will be much poorer than real color vision, right. So of course, you could make a computer that sees many, many more colors and video, and he has sound very different resolution. And we could see X ray and gravity and other things, it's also possible that you would have make a system that is much smaller, so maybe plants are intelligent, but they if they are intelligent, they are much, much slower, because they don't have a nervous system. So the signals and the plan travel at a very low speed, they only move between adjacent cells. And this means that they can only move at a distance of a few millimeters every second. So if the planet is intelligent, it's going to be super slow. And everything that we are doing is going to be a total blur for the plant. It's very, probably very confusing to see these all these blurry shapes wishing about and so on. And also the plant is not getting that old, because it's time ran so slowly, right. So by the time the plant dies, even if it's a few years, our time or a few decades, our time for the plant, a very short time has passed. So maybe it hasn't done that much in that time. And in the same way, it's the plant is going to be a very different intelligence from us, because it's going to construct a very different world to be in. And if you have an AI, it doesn't need to have a body at our scale. For instance, AI could be a bank, or it could be a company, or a university or a hospital, right, and what is the body of a hospital, what's the world of a hospital, it's good can take all the cameras that exists in the hospital and all the data all the heart rate monitors, all the financial data of the hospital, the personal records, everything. And it's all going to be at sense organs. And it's going to make a model of this right. So we are not going to live next to this kind of AI we are going to live inside of it. It's like we are in the gut bacteria inside of such thing. And it could be that this AI that we interact with is going to relate to us in the same way as our gut bacteria relate to us, right? So it's, it's a very different world to be in. But I think in principle, it should be possible to build an AI that is perceiving the world the similar granularity and to tamp it down so much that it so that its processing is as slow as our processing. And it would be possible to make it perceivable that is somewhat similar to ours, so we can really communicate it in similar terms.

Unknown 1:02:56
People ask what if computers are already conscious in ways that we don't know about?

Joscha Bach 1:03:04
I don't really think that is the case. Because consciousness is a type of model. It's a, it's a story that has been written by your own brain. You know, how it is possible that a character in a book experience is something right. So if you read Harry Potter, Harry Potter has feelings. And it's because somebody, Ms. Rowling wrote a story where she wrote these feelings into the story, right? It's been written by the author into the book. And in our case, the book is being written by the brain. So the brain writes into this book, your child is experiencing the following thing, and your child is reading this book. So the brain is reading this book, and then it finds, oh, I am feeling the following thing. Am I being real? And the book says, You are totally real. Everything that you experience is real right now. But am I really, really real? Am I not just reading a book? Yes, it's really real. It's it's written here in the book, right? And everything that you read is being updated. And so it leads to an update on the story, your short reads that He is real, and that the experience is something and therefore he decides the next thought. And this next thought is based on what's been written in the book, the book is being written, it's not a book, it's like a movie, or a 3d world that has been written and thereby the brain is being used to make decisions. It's being used to update the behavior of the entire brain of the entire organism. And so this story itself, this agent in this world is not the one that runs the show myself is not real, in a sense, it's only a character in the story. But everything that this character experiences is being used by the brain to decide what it should do next. And so I live in the stream and the story that has been written by the author the brain. I cannot really change what is happening there. But what I can observe from the outside are the mechanisms I can catch my brain writing these things. I can observe the mechanisms of my brain to a large degree. And when we observe our computers, we know exactly what they're doing. And they're not writing such a story. And unless we make them too, and we don't really know how to get a computer to write a story that is as rich and autonomous and informing its behavior, and his attention in the same way to its contents, is our own brain does. So we would notice, I think, if our computers would behave like this, because we have would have to build it into this, and the computers would have to have these models at the level that we can discern. It's more difficult for, say, cats. But it's a cat conscious, for instance. And I think the question of whether a cat has consciousness, whether it has a dream, in which there is the cat itself, together with its environment, and the cat is aware of the fact that it is in that dream, that it's aware of itself, and of its relationship to the world. And as we have seen this cat, Mr. Toddler initially in this video, right. And I think it's clear that the cat needs to have selective attention, it needs to know what it's attending to, it needs to know what this means what it's attending to. And so I think that the cat is clearly conscious. And at the moment, there is no computer which does this in this way.

Unknown 1:06:13
There is a lengthy question about the language comprehension and synesthesia, is language, a form of synesthesia, like experiencing images upon hearing certain sounds?

Joscha Bach 1:06:29
That's a very good question. I think, yes, in some sense it is. And, you know, there are some people like me, which don't experience images when we hear sounds. So while I can meditate for long enough, I can have synesthesia and my normal state of mind I have a Fantasia which is the opposite. So when I close my eyes and imagine something, I'm not seeing anything, my wife is an artist, when she closes her eyes, imagine something that you can see it and draw it. And when I draw something, it's like a design, I can see whether I hit this, my brain is making these images at some point, but I cannot see them. And I think with respect to sound, and you saw the synesthetic images, your brain is already producing these images, but you cannot see them, it's because you don't know how to direct attention on them how to get attention to this part of your brain, it's because this part of your brain is working so well that the conductor never looks at it. So if you want to learn how to make this, you have to make the conductor look this way, and the conductor have to find out when the room is this instrument that makes this background sound. And he did sound so far in the background that the conductor doesn't really know where it's coming from, because it's always working out, it's always on beat, there's no need to pay attention to it. And it doesn't even know in which direction to look to see where this instrument is that makes it. But I think that the this idea that you have that there is a certain synesthesia, when you visualize your mental imagination. Yes, that's true. It's synesthesia. Also, basically, when you see when you look into the world, and you see images, it's also a form of synesthesia, right? Because the physical world doesn't have images. And then the images are construct of your mind to make sense of this, in some sense, mathematical functions that are dynamically playing out in your brain and that you can look at an experience.

Unknown 1:08:15
Some people actually asked whether it's possible to practice synesthesia to get

Joscha Bach 1:08:21
Yes, so there are certain meditations that you can use to, to practice synesthesia. Sometimes you can also dream sounds. And I found the best way to practice is when I'm in bed morning, before I'm fully awake. So it needs to be totally quiet. No kids, no noises, no traffic noises, no alarm clock, they need to have time. So don't need to get up at a fixed time. But when I wake up, and I have like, half an hour or so, and I make myself not get fully awake, I make sure that my brain doesn't fully boot. So I remain in a half dream, where I can think and direct my thoughts and play with my mind and make my dream where I want to go with. And this is a state where my mind is most playable. But it's very difficult to keep it in that state because it gets easily distracted, you wake up too much. And you wake up into thinking that you are a person and then you're dreaming everything that you dream every day. And in this in between state you realize you're not actually a person you're not a human being you are just the mind that is dreaming.

Unknown 1:09:26
So in other question, do you think that vision and hearing are distracting us from perceiving the world?

Joscha Bach 1:09:36
Again,

Unknown 1:09:38
do you think that vision and hearing is distracting us from perceiving the world?

Joscha Bach 1:09:45
Oh, yes, definitely. very stimulating, right. So it's also our main access to the world. But if we want to understand what's going on, sometimes it's better to close your eyes and distance yourself and you and focus on the bigger picture. So when you want to understand how society is working, it's often a very good idea to forget that you're an individual human being. And to move back to zoom out very, very far to a point where there is no more vision and sound. And try to imagine that you are everything that you are looking at. So you're no longer a human being, but you are a society from this perspective, and you try to perceive what's happening inside of you.

Unknown 1:10:38
So there was some just discussion chat, let me get to the questions, because people were discussing things between themselves. Could AI experience all electromagnetic frequencies from sounds and radio waves to radiation and color? Yes, when is the same sensory modality?

Joscha Bach 1:10:59
No, the sensory modalities depend on the structure of the electromagnetic patterns, right? You're right, that everything that you perceive is electromagnetic, that's a very good point. So there are four forces that we know of, in the world. This is gravity, electromagnetism, and the strong force and the weak force. And the strong force and the weak force are only inside of atoms. And they are so small, that they're probably not even in space. And the space that we are normally talking about is the electromagnetic space is the space where electromagnetic fields exist. And if you touch this thing, then the electromagnetic force between the electrons in the atoms are pushing against each other, so touches electromagnetic. And when you see things, it's electromagnetic waves that come in as photons. And when you hear things, it's the atoms in the air molecules in the air pushing against each other via the electrons. And so everything that you perceive is electromagnetic, but what you hear is basically a structure in the patterns of very fast waves that are too fast for our neurons to just assemble. So it measures the energy of this, this is what sound is about. And vision is about the spatial arrangement of photons. So in which order come the photons from which direct which momentum they have, which direction do they come from, and this is what's being measured there. And so the structure of vision is very different from the structure of sound, the structure of sound is, in some sense energy over time. So it's a two dimensional thing. And the structure of vision is direction and intensity over time. And this direction is measured in two dimensions, at least so direction that things come from. And what we find is that these two dimensions, a plane that everything is projected on is a projection from three dimensions. And that's because the space of electromagnetic interactions is for some reason that we don't fully understand yet. But there's some good theories, it's three dimensional, right, the space in which three dimensional interactions play out can be projected into three mathematical dimensions. I don't know if you already understand what dimensions are. But then

Unknown 1:13:17
people discuss dimensions in our class. So. So

Joscha Bach 1:13:21
to me, when I tried to make sense of dimensions, I understood it very late. And maybe it's a different direction that you take, start out with numbers, a number is a way to subsequently number things. It's a numbering scheme. So a labeling scheme. So you give everything a name. And you can have infinitely many things and you give each one a new name, this is what numbers are about. So it orders things with these names. And the numbers allow you to order things. So you can order your numbers into a line a number line. And then you can define actions on this line to move around. And the main most important movement is basically fun to the next one to the one to the right, one to the left is a successor and predecessor. And if you repeat this, you can move an arbitrary distance. And this is what addition is doing addition allows you to travel on a number line by an arbitrary distance. And then you can zoom in and zoom out. And this is multiplication. And if you want to have a second dimension, you need to distinguish numbers in such a way that some of the numbers are going in a different direction. So you could basically take your number line and fold it up in a pattern in like a chessboard. And you'd say in one direction, I add numbers to it in the other direction, add letters to it like on a chessboard. So you have now have two dimensional numbers. And then you can define how to go not only to the right into the left, but also down on this chessboard. And now you can also define two dimensional addition and two dimensional multiplication. So you can jump in two dimensions and you can zoom in two dimensions. And then two dimensions. You can also do a very cool thing. You can rotate it Write the rotation means that you basically multiply the letters digits with the letters. And when you multiply the digits with the letters, you can rotate, you can take took a thing that looks the same if even if you turn it at an angle. This trick only works with two dimensions and four dimensions and eight dimensions. No, no, no the other dimensions. And it seems that our own work can also only have rotations in two dimensions, and four dimensions and eight dimensions. So it's made from similar mathematics, or maybe our mathematics or all the mathematics there are.

Unknown 1:15:37
So we have, like, 95, new messages, I don't know if you're ready for that. So I'll just I'll just go one after another. So Seth, says, Could you make it so it could utilize lesser processing power for communication, and then improve its processing power to carry out the orders gotten from the communication? I don't understand that question. I said, I also don't understand that. So try to restate it. Okay. And while you're doing it, we'll get to the next one, which is simpler one, what if communication is an illusion? Simply this information, but not

Joscha Bach 1:16:29
yes. It depends, of course, on what is communication, and so on. And you could start out with what is the communication with individual neurons are doing right. So the individual neurons are, in some sense communicating to each other. They are single celled animals that live in a dark universe, and they only hear the pings of other neurons. And they don't know that the other neurons. And so they have to make sense of these things in a way and what they mean. And some of these things probably just mean, if you just think me in the right moment, so you're going to get fat in the future. And this is, in some sense, what the neuron is going to learn, it's going to learn which signals it needs to send, so it gets foot, it doesn't die, the brain, if the neuron is not sending its pings at the right moment, it's going to die. And there's not a big misunderstanding about this, if the neuron is not doing this, right, if it's not figuring this out, it's going to die. And similar thing happens with human beings in the world, you have to send the right signals into the world. And if you'd get the right responses, it predicts that you're getting fed and your needs are being met. And if not, then it doesn't make sense at all. But you don't know what the others thought. You don't know if they're referred to the same meaning if they live to this in the same universe, if they're constructed the same universe. And we have this illusion that you're all the same, and that there's one right way of doing it. This is not the case, right? The world that I grew up in that is completely normal to me would be weird to most people and the world where other people grow up is weird, to me, it's basically just the place that I grew up in to enrich my brain found some kind of equilibrium state, where it's trying to make sense of the world. And everything that I perceive is a deviation from that normal state that doesn't even exist anymore in the world. Right. So if you communicate, we have to account for that we have to try to make a model in which we understand how others are operating. And we only can do this to a very limited degree. We are not really human beings in the sense you're all space aliens that are born into human body each in a slightly different way. And then we try to make sense what's happening and what's happening. And then we try to talk across these different universes. So at some level, our understanding is an illusion. And another one it's not because it's not less real than the how we understand ourselves. It's I don't think that it's more difficult to understand other people than to understand you, it's than it is to understand yourself.

Unknown 1:19:01
So set, try to ask another question of could you improve human processing power to be able to build and make infinite humans by making computers, which now perceive at the same speed as there is increased power humans set? I'm not sure again, what

Joscha Bach 1:19:23
I think it would no longer be humans if you could do that. So if you're in for instance, if you would upload a human being and the computer hypothetically. So imagine you scan the brain at a very, very high resolution, which you cannot and then translate the state and the wiring of all the neurons into a computer program and simulate it into a giant computer. And then you give this giant computer access to very different senses and to different needs and would have different needs. It would change it would become something different. So you could probably in that sense is becoming a planet, and this planet that thinks and interacts with the universe. But after a few 100 years, this planet would no longer be anything like a human, it would be a very different thing. Our identity is constructed over the way we interact with the world and our memories of how we interacted with the world in the past. And at some point, our identity is going to change into the new thing.

Unknown 1:20:26
It was a nice conversation here, what the fear and the AI of another alien species and another person meant said, we will be about a I was little processing speed. So obviously, I have another alien species.

Joscha Bach 1:20:52
Yeah, I would be an alien tool.

Unknown 1:20:59
So let's get to the questions. Should we try and give AI things that we can never have, such as for deviation, ultraviolet vision and nonlinear thinking? Of course.

Joscha Bach 1:21:26
I mean, this would be the whole point, right? We want to make it smarter than us and give it more sense of the world. And in some sense, we are also extending our own thinking in these directions, we find tools that allow us to extend our vision, and we find tools that allow us to extend our thinking.

Unknown 1:21:45
What if we detect aliens that don't live in our dimension? Or aren't visible in the light spectrum? Or don't make audible sounds? It's probably not what it could be?

Joscha Bach 1:21:59
It's an interesting question, if, if there can be structure in this universe that is made from non electromagnetic interactions, so the universe that you're looking at is the one that is made from molecules that stay in some electromagnetic relationships to each other, right. And the from these molecules, you can build planets that exist in three dimensions, only in three dimensions would planetary orbits be stable in four dimensions, the planets would basically drift off in space, if you took them a little bit, in two dimensions, you tip the little bit, they just tumble in the sun, and then three dimensions, right raid region, if you take a planet that is moving around a sign in an orbit and you tip it a little bit, it's just going to settle in a slightly low or high orbit, and it's not going to go to the Sun easily and not going to veer off in space. So just to have stable planets with surfaces on which life can form, you need to have three dimensions. And for the other interactions, maybe they don't form these three dimensional patterns. So it could be that the aliens could only exist in in 3d, but we don't know that. So we don't have physics of everything. And it's conceivable that, for instance, think about dark matter. Maybe dark matter, this is a matter that doesn't have electromagnetic interactions. So it cannot be seen as light and perceive by touching it. And only we can only notice it by gravity. And so is there an 80% of the matter in our universe, as far as we know, at the moment is dark matter is not sensitive to light and cannot be touched. So we just move through it, and it moves through us. And so you could think of this as this universe in a different dimension. And since it's 80%, maybe, you know, there's maybe there is 10 Dark Forces, and maybe there are many dark matter civilizations that exist in these dark forces. And they have picked difficulty to discover our universe, because we are only 20% of the earth. Right? So it's conceivable that this exists in a way. But the dark matter is organized in as we map it into the same space as ours. And we noticed that for instance, there's gravitational halo around our galaxy. So it's basically aligned with the three dimensions that we have. And so as far as we understand dark matter, it exists in the scene, it seems three dimensional arrangement. It just doesn't have the electromagnetic interactions if you do have, but what would happen if there is another order in the universe that is orthogonal? Where basically the space is mapped out in a different way? And it's conceivable, right? But in the baby tree exists, it's very hard for us to notice it and to make sense of it. Sometimes I think, you know, we are like little spiders that live in spiders net. And this we measure the air tacking on the threats of this of the spiders net and we try to model the entire world based on how things tack on our little spiders net and the spiders net is maybe in in the basement in a big restaurant in a big city. In a big country, and this isn't an entire universe, and the only thing that the spider notices is what things tack on its small little spiders in it, that there is a limit to what the spider can figure out.

Unknown 1:25:14
And that is a question Should we try to make computers think nonlinear non linearly?

Joscha Bach 1:25:22
So what do you mean by non linearity,

Unknown 1:25:25
what languages that could use and how they would experience the world if they did.

Joscha Bach 1:25:31
So, for instance, if we want to have a language that is understood between different people, that problem is we need to make this language learnable. Right language doesn't exist as a physical thing, it takes into thin air between speakers. So, language gets very limited, to make it vulnerable. Our languages are made from discrete structures, they can all be mapped into a single dimension. That's why you can read them all this text text is one dimension, right. And they are discrete symbols, every character, every letter, every word is discrete, they are having a beginning and an end, and nothing in between. And so, this language is, in some sense, quite limited in the way what you can do. But by using enough of these parts, you can create nuances in between. But our natural language only works by referring to the perceptual context that everyone has. So it refers to similar structures of meaning. And if you have a system that is referring to very different structures of meaning, then the communication is going to be very difficult, because you can no longer communicate across boundaries. And the same thing exists within the system itself. So every system that is building structures of meaning needs to communicate throughout its own architecture throughout its own system. So your if your brain is trying to think about things that cannot be expressed in other parts of the brain, then the other parts of the brain will not know what this part of the brain is talking about. So naturally, your brain will always move into states that works throughout the entire cortex, in some sense, that is a compatible that fit to each other, at least complement each other. And so there is a limit to the languages that any kind of information processing is using, because it depends on what parts are learnable for the other parts of the information processing system.

Unknown 1:27:21
So thank you so much. People are kind of getting tired now. So it's a lot to process

Joscha Bach 1:27:30
one and a half hours as we wanted to. Thank you guys.

Unknown 1:27:39
So if you wish I will send you all the questions, you know.

Joscha Bach 1:27:44
Yeah. So

Unknown 1:27:49
yes, thank you so much. That was absolutely amazing.

Joscha Bach 1:27:53
Thank you, Tony.

Unknown 1:27:54
Thank you a lot. See people say it was eye opening. Okay, you tell us a wonderful,

Joscha Bach 1:28:04
wonderful day or afternoon, wherever you are.

Unknown 1:28:08
Thank you so much.

Joscha Bach 1:28:13
I'm in Menlo Park, California right now. Okay,

Unknown 1:28:22
here we go. And there was a day, goodbye. Goodbye, everyone. Thank you for coming. I think we learned a lot today. Right? And then we'll have the recording so you'll be able to watch it again. Goodbye. Goodbye. Goodbye. Have a good weekend. Yes. Bye. Bye, everyone.
