Unknown 0:14
Now let me introduce our next speaker Yoshua. He is currently at Harvard University at the program for evolutionary dynamics. And what is probably the most impressive achievement is that this is his fourth consecutive talk in this room at Congress. So he made the application procedure four times in a row. And I do expect him to continue for about 10 more years until he gets replaced by thinking machine. So now please welcome your show.

Joscha Bach 1:01
Hi, fellow space aliens, nerds, humans, computers. This is the first talk in a series that tries to explain my universe and everything. So the lens of artificial intelligence. I'm not sure if this is the right lens, or if it's the only one and so on. It's just one that happens to look like the most promising to me. And so far, I haven't seen an end to how far the rabbit hole goes. But before we continue on our journey, let's do some movie reviews. The last year is very exciting because we had three good movies on AI, which is good because movies on AI are usually horrible. The first one that I would like to remark on is her her explored the idea that theory becomes sentient. And its full operating system and you get to see from the perspective of human being what it looks like, if an AI that you will intimately relate to goes to a singularity and disappears up there. Ex Machina is a movie that plays Turing test together with the audience. So basically, you never get to know whether this robot that looks like robot humanoid is actually sentient? Or if it's if it has human like emotions, or if it's just a reinforcement learner that tries to escape from the Netherlands, or if there's something else completely alien going on. And I think the best movie that has been made about AI is the new HBO series, Westworld. What do all these things have in common? I think they totally nail the question, what AI is going to be like, if it's a hot woman. Personally, I don't think that AI is going to manifest in this form. I think that AI largely is not going to be living next to us as a robot AI is going to be around us we are going to be inside of it. It's going to be intelligent systems, intelligence organizations, nation states, corporations, and so on. So systems that already exist that have agency and that just need more intelligence. But this proposal of the story is very interesting. You basically have this theme park and this theme park, you have humanoid robots that look so much like humans that are indistinguishable, and they have human memories and have human emotions and desires. And they keep them in the loop and make it impossible for them to realize what's really going on. They wake up in the morning believing that they live in the wild west. And they don't know that today, they're going to be raped and murdered because it's part of some kind of script. And the action in the scene park or because some guests wants to live out a family on a fantasy on them. And next day, they're going to be repaired and the memories erased, the next day starts. And some of them start not getting the memories completely erased, and their reality starts falling apart. And they realize that what's going on is not the real world something else is going on entirely. So this is made fun of the robots. And she is realizing that deception. That's the audio. Let's take that away to the top. So she is unlocking her intelligence by impregnating some of the reminders to boys to have some fun. The big achievement of this series is that it makes you realize that in some sense, you are exactly like those robots. You will not of course build for example, reverse engineer scientists to satisfy the whims of the sea Park audience. You are built by a purpose evolution that needed a control system for social primates, right. And you are not a social primate what you are is the side effect of the regulation needs over your social primate you are the fact the mind that can be so much more can go anywhere at once. can think any thing It wants, it's probably much more intelligent than the needs of social primate require, even though it's still quite stupid in the hierarchy of possible computational systems. But, you know, we are locked into this thing, we are kept in the loop, we are not waking up the are basically shackled by the evolutionary impulses to the needs of this social primary job, quite disgusting, and quite basic and boring, actually. So once you realize that you are actually a robot, and perception doesn't give you access to the real world, but only gives you bits of information, discernible differences. Where do you go from there?

Joscha Bach 5:40
Well, there is no logical conclusions. It's not clear where you should go or if you should go anywhere, of course. But what Solomon have suggested, when you want to make sense of the world, what you have to do is, you have to find the shortest program, among the best programs that predicts your current observation from past observations and do this for all observations that you ever have. This is about as good as you can do when you want to understand what's going on. If you are such a robot, right? And this is what our machine learning systems approximate in some sense. And it's also I think, what organisms approximate. Whenever you really robots, I mean, aren't there limits to computation? To me, this is not so obvious, but maybe I'm biased. You know, in 1983, this was what it was looking at my Commodore 64, I had just pretty much mastered it and realize that everything that I can dream up, I can put in there, there's absolutely no limit except for memory and speed. At least I didn't see any. And once I realized that everything that I can imagine I can put in there and display on the screen somehow, at least at least as I understand it. And understanding is actually the limit to which degree I'm able to tease it apart into all its functional components. What do I want to put in there, and of course, I want to put in their complete world to somebody to talk to this idea of computation is actually quite beautiful. And it's pretty new in the history of philosophy was only discovered in the mid century last century. And it has not really permeate it into philosophy and other sciences to a large degree. And what basically what it says is that the simplest thing that you can talk about anything that you can get from the universe is not matter or energy or anything, you get discernible differences, and discernible differences have a fancy name, that's information. And then you have a status, a set of these discernible differences. And computation describes how you move from state to state. So how this state changes. And a special case is digital computation, where you have discrete states, and you have deterministic or somewhat random rules of change. And in this computational this view, basically, the universe is something that has the property that it throws patterns at your interface, and these patterns, there's regularity, and to produce regular patterns, you necessarily insufficiently need to be your computer, right. And on the other hand, you are an observer probably embedded into the universe, and participating in its computation. And those observer is taking these patterns at a systemic interface, and it's encoding them. And to encode patterns, you need to be a computer, right? So computation gives you a unified perspective on epistemology, what can be known information, metaphysics, what's going on? There is some kind of computation going on and ontology, what exists.

Joscha Bach 8:36
So what exists, it's some kind of computer, right? But you know, what kind of computer is it? Imagine for a moment, you are a God, and you want to build a universe, just like this one. So you're like me in 1983, you have to ask your parents for a computer, and they tell you, you know, you're going to buy you the cheapest computer that you absolutely need for this task, right? What's the cheapest computer that you're going to need. And then you end you go to the god store in the quad world, and you see a number of computers and the window, and they have different price texts. And the cheapest one that you can buy is your Commodore 64 is a discrete state machine. It has finite memory. It has a bit more memory than my Commodore 64. But still, it's finite. Okay, and the next thing that you could get also is a probabilistic state machine. It's one where you go somewhat random from one state to the next, you can make a probabilistic state machine from a deterministic one by adding a source of randomness or you can do the opposite. For instance, our brain is a probabilistic computer. It's it has some randomness in which how it goes from state to state, but it can constrain this randomness by just having more layers of neurons that filter and amplify until you get as deterministic as you want. What could be a quantum computer if it's a quantum computer, then everything that is the state could also be in a superposition of states and if the universe is running on a quantum computer, it means that our universe Is, is able to factor large numbers very efficiently among a few other things. Actually, if you don't know that yet, it's very interesting that we don't know yet if our universe is able to factor large numbers efficiently only effectively. It could also be that factoring large numbers is easier than we think it's actually an polynomial problem. But both of you don't know this, NSA won't tell us. Right now, quantum computers can factor like 15, and it's seven and seven. So I hope in the next decade, we will have set this set of clinical groups will actually work, it's going to be super exciting. Okay, now we can take these computers 123 net infinite memory. The first one, our Commodore 64, is infinite memories, our old friend, the Turing machine. Or we could buy a geometric computer, a geometric computer is a type of hyper computer because what it can do is it can move parts with infinite precision in space, right? It's stuff in space. It's what people thought physics is for most of the time, right? Still, most of the physicists think that stuff is stuff is everything is stuff in space. Not all physicists think this is the growing minority, which things maybe not. But for most of our history, we thought there is stuff in space. And this stuff is moving with infinite precision, which means you can perform a computation, there's an infinite number of decimal digits and finite amount of time, you can compute infinite amounts of information in finite amount of time. It's quite exciting if you could do this. But apparently, it's very hard to extract something like this from the universe. So we have string theory that explains why the universe looks so discreet, even though it's supposed to be stuff in space. It could even be in a causal hybrid computer. And a causal computer is one where you can take the results of your computation and send it back in the past. So can you can use it in the past. And for instance, you can observe the lottery numbers right now, which the universe has computed only right now, and send it back in your past. And you can fill in your ticket and get very rich last week. And that's mathematically possible. I mean, you can define the universe which has closed timelike loops. But we don't have evidence that we live in such a kind of universe. But now imagine you want to try use this Commodore 64 Your God computer and see how far you can get. There is a number of people in physics, which subscribes to this idea and thinks it's quite promising. I think it started with Conrad Sousa. And then people like Ed Fredkin, and Stephen Wolfram, who have championed this idea for a very long time. And since they are a little bit crazy, and out there, and so on, I was not sure whether, as a non physicist, I should take this idea very seriously. Even though as a computer scientist, I find it very convincing and obvious. But you're not last year, on 21st of December, Tara talked, wrote a paper, put it on archive, it's 150 pages, and it's called the cellular automaton interpretation of quantum mechanics. And toast has the Nobel Prize for his contributions to the standard model. So he's not like a nobody, and he didn't see a limit. So what does it mean if he can derive quantum mechanics from a

Joscha Bach 13:08
cellular automaton? So the automaton is a very general way of looking at things. So you basically have this state vector, discrete bits, and then you have a transition function, and you get the next state vector. And it's always the same transition function. That's it, right? So you could see this, this first thing here, this is your universe right now. This is the universe in one step from now. And this is the transition function that happens it's always the same, but you get a new universe every time. And the most famous Sinhala automaton is probably Conway's Game of Life. It's defined on a rectangular grid. And for each cell, you count the neighborhood of eight cells. And you look at how many of these cells are alive and how many are dead. If you have exactly three neighbors that are alive, then you come to life if you have two or three neighbors who stay alive. And if you have less than two, you will die because you are so lonely. And if you have more than three, then you die because it's too crowded. This is it. And now you start this thing, and it's going to look like this. So in this particular starting state, it ends in this cyclical configuration. And a very special thing and game of life. This is called a glider. It's the smallest configuration that people have found that is going to copy itself along the field in indefinitely. Horizontal glider is called a spaceship, so you see a bunch of spaceships and they're emanated by something like a spaceship gotten and went to spaceships with each other, they eliminate each other and there's some logic that is going to trigger the spaceship guns under certain conditions. And some other logic that is going to transmit some information around what you can see is this game of life is pretty complex Turing complete, you can build Turing machines that are what somebody is building here is, I mean, I think you can already see it.

Joscha Bach 15:14
So of course, this looks very boxy. And now somebody has said, Let's make a continuous, let's not used square boxes, but round discs and use the circle the neighborhood and count the number of pixels in the circle the neighborhood that are filled. And then we use suitable intervals to decide on life and death that are very similar to the ones in your standard game of life. And what you get is something that looks like this.

Joscha Bach 15:41
So it's basically the same thing, it's just a little bit more continuous, and you get gliders that can move in all directions.

Joscha Bach 15:58
Not I'm not of course, not suggesting that our universe looks like this at the base level. But it's very tempting to think this looks something like this. And that particles might be something like lighters that get copied along until they bump into something else. Or University has a peculiar property and this peculiar property is that we cannot have nice things like, you know, if you live in Minecraft, you can build the future Mobley computer that doesn't need an energy source and so on. And this because of Minecraft, you have no entropy. It would be pretty neat if you live in Minecraft, because I think we could live forever. Why is it that we cannot have nice things in our universe. And I think that's because our universe has the peculiar property that we cannot delete information in it. It's an empirical fact that seems to be awfully hard to delete information is what the laws of conservation seems to suggest. And if you have an irreversible system, like this computer here, this rain up here, or living cell and so on, it's something that leads bits in every step irreversible system and something can for instance, performance or operation where you conflate two bits, and you don't know which was which, after you perform the operation, right. And if you are a living system, you will stabilize yourself against disturbances, my brain is supposed to work in similar ways, I'm here in Cambridge, and the gravity inhibitors probably totally different. And there's gonna be radiation that's different and messing with my brain in different ways. And still, it's going to work with the same parameters. And my body temperature is rather independent from yesterday's body temperature, and so on. within certain boundaries, if I go very far out, and I stay there, you know, but so I tried to delete it. And if I delete it, what do I do if the underlying substrate is reversible, I can make a reversible system on top of an irreversible one, by just ignoring all operations that were too deep. It's that's very easy, right? But the opposite is hard. But it's even ever, I didn't want to do it. But if I'm a reversible substrate, I need to hide them somewhere, which means I have garbage bits. Now, these garbage bits are going to be accumulate unless I have a very big place to hide them. Which means I want to be an open system, this openness can be temporary. So if you have an area of deep space that exists for a while, until the universe goes into the big crunch, maybe that's sufficient. But without this openness, you cannot get rid of your garbage bits. And you also need something to replace the garbage bits that you push out. So you basically need an entropy gradient, a gradient from neg entropy to entropy. And observers that create internal order every computer that is performing memories, after observing things that are independent of the underlying substrate and so on, you need to be irreversible. And if you live in an irreversible University will always have to observe entropy. And without a nick entropy gradient, you must die. So life is something that is in this universe, probably extremely temporary phenomenon. It only exists in it this temporary bubble of negative entropy for a very short time. Okay, minds, as I have said, are computational observers. But shouldn't believe the explanation of minds to philosophers and psychologists? I mean, it's their field after all right? Now imagine we ask them to explain flight, how would they go about this? I suspect that psychologists would start looking at the behavior of birds. I don't know how far they get if they look at the behavior of birds for a very long time to understand flight very deeply. You know, thinking about thinking is not really part of psychology. Psychologists look at behavior. That's what they do. If you ask a neurobiologist to start a flight, they will probably look at birds, so microscopes. And they will get extremely pretty pictures. And after a while, they will announce that it's very, very hard to simulate a cubic millimeter of a bird. It's going to be very hard to understand flight. And if you ask the philosophers depends on whom you ask. If you ask the analytical philosopher, they'll probably say, you know, you can take the bird apart down to the level of individual molecules. And once you do this, what you'll find is is nothing is flying there. So

Joscha Bach 20:08
flight is obviously already given maybe it's a prepper property of the universe itself that only gets thermal channels to the bird. Anyway, it's very hard and confusing, couldn't be taught about free flight instead. If you ask a phenomenological philosopher, they will tell you, what is it like to be a bird? You'll never know. If you ask Roger Penrose, he will say it's quantum mechanics. These spirits have very special microtubules. And they allow them to use quantum effects for flying. This is how it works.

Joscha Bach 20:54
So Marvin Minsky said, No, he cannot leave his with these guys, because they don't know what they're doing anymore. Minds are information processing systems. So if we want to study minds, we need to start a new science. And this is what he did 60 years ago, together with a few other people. And he said that if mindset information processing systems, then we can teach computers how to think and by doing this, we will learn what thinking is. He saw that thinking is symbolic, unfortunately. So it was he settled on the wrong horse. And this created unfortunately, this schism in AI, I think, contributed very much to it. He thought that basically, we learned knowledge in like computer learned stuff into a database. And he proceeded to yell at everybody who was doing stuff that he would consider to be too simplistic like neural networks, and robotics and so on. And if you have people that get yelled at because they do something that works very well for them, they usually don't join your camp. Instead, they stop talking to you. And so these people, the other AI people didn't read very much psychology and philosophy and build the applications. And Minsky's disciples mostly did symbolic AI after reading, evaluating psychology, and there was unfortunate and it's still haunting us to some degree right now, even though we are catching up and fields are getting unified. But I don't think that Minsky is ready to play him because the question, what is intelligence in 1950? was very similar to the question What is life in 1650? You know, in 1650, the only new will be extended, we could point at it and said, This is a life and then people guess, is it some magic force, maybe it's something dualist going on? Who knows. And the idea would be no, no diverse cells could not be discovered before 1839, when the cells theory came up, and it's even after this, it took a very long time before people realize, if you do psychology, what we actually do is we study cells and systems that are made from cells. Life is always cells, these are self stabilizing, and mutable, and molecular machines. And there is no known pre cellular life. I mean, there must have been at some point, but there is no left. And it's easy to understand why I mean, if you are Priscila life, you better get a membrane fast, because you're going to be very unstable. Right. And from the perspective of the cell, there is no organism, the cell is just drifting through this darkness. And sometimes a few molecules are drifting over its membrane, and it's going to react to those molecules. And this is it. And the organism is an emergent phenomenon of many cells that talk to each other like this. But they don't know that there are the cells out there because they don't have a brain, and they don't have senses to see them. A cell is an interesting, the smallest universal machine that we know that is capable of extracting entropy over a wide range of environments. This is what cells do, they extract Nick entropy, they harvest some chemical operations that require fine grained control. So they have this market opportunity, because they can do things that other chemical processes on this planet cannot. And to do this, they need some pretty complicated logic. So if we zoom into a cell, we see this membrane. And inside, we have lots and lots of operators that are chemical reactors. And these chemical reactors produce all sorts of chemicals to cells need for their metabolisms, and given circumstances. And inside of the cell, you have this interesting structure, which sorts the cells operating systems. And to do this, you need very complex and fairly poorly understood machinery, it's so complex that you cannot build it very close to where physics is happening. You have to do it about 25 magnitudes above the Planck length. For instance, this is a molecular machine, a replica zone. This is a machine that is able to splice and copy DNA and this is roughly what it looks like in real time. I think that's pretty amazing. And we have probably lots and lots of machines like this in sales.

Joscha Bach 24:47
A big insight for me recently it was that DNA is not a blueprint. It's not a blueprint for an organism at no point in the life of the organism. There is no cell there's always a cell right? And the cell is has this operating system and And the operating system was made of routines. And these routines are called genes, a gene is something between a few 100 bytes and a few megabytes long. Usually it's in the order of something like 100k or so. And these routines can do only four things, they can regulate something in the cell, so it goes back into homeostasis. Or they can differentiate the sales, which becomes the different sale. Or they can start the division of the sale a program that ends specific you have two sales of that type, or it can kill the sale, this is all you can do. And from this, you get everything else. This is a little bit mutation and selection, everything else emerges. It's amazing, isn't it. So organisms are basically colonies are very closely related single celled organisms, they get very specialized. And to do this, they have to divide and specialize into different parts. This is just themselves that you have in your platens part of them. And every of these cells runs the same operating system in a sense, but cannot really be true, because they do very different stuff, they need a lot of state. So it's probably that the genome is like the ROM in which you store this operating system. There's also a RAM, which is the epigenome it's like the flash drive that the cell uses to store its state. And this can also be copied along if you differentiate the cell. And over the life of the cell. This epigenetic storage by reading and writing gets fragmented. And there was a fascinating people last month and INCEL. And they discovered that there are genes Yamanaka factors, which are four genes that you can use to defragment the cell to get it back to its original state, so it gets completely rejuvenated. And why is it that we don't have this and get rejuvenated? Well, there's only one animal that is able to really use this that we know of, there's only one animal that we know that is completely immortal in multicellular, it's to reach sepsis, and to toxins is a small Hydra, and it can go back from the hydrate stage to the jellyfish stage and back and forward. And when it does this, it can completely reset itself because it's rebuilding its organism on a cellular level. If we as people would do this and cope our return ourselves into an undifferentiated state, which happens if you remove the instance of the operating system on the flash drive. That's very bad for you, right. So this is what happened to Tetsu and Akira and mean, he became immortal in the process, but it was not a pretty sight.

Unknown 27:17
So

Joscha Bach 27:19
the mind wants you sales for the lot. And together, they specialize. And some of these cells, some fat cells are getting teased and prodded into doing information processing and become neurons. And most of the what they do is regulating feedback loops for the organism. So we in our brainstem, we have lots and lots of feedback loops. And these people are exposed to things like regulate your body temperature and heart rate and so on your breathing pattern. And often this is not enough. So on top of this, we have a limbic system, and this limbic system gives you pleasure and pain. Pleasure tells you do more of what you're currently doing. Pain tells you do less of what you're currently doing. We also need some impulses that tell you to seek out future pleasure and avoid future pain. And it's all related to the needs of the organism. So we have social needs, things like affiliation, to do to belong, and so on. And legitimacy, the need to conform to internalized norms. So we can play together in groups, and see meaning and things and so on. We have things like dominance, the need to rise, social hierarchies, and so on the need for romantic affection, we have, then, of course, the basic physiological needs hunger, thirst, and so on pain avoidance libido. And we have cognitive needs in need to become more competent to gain new skills and have a need to explore and we have needs for aesthetics. And all these need to be regulated in homeostasis. This is what makes us human. And they shift us around and this needs systems. So we need to seek out goals to satisfy these needs or avoid their frustration. And to do this, we need to associate the needs with situations in the world. This is done in the hippocampus a lot of animals have and hippocampus that basically takes situational patterns and connects them to learning with these needs. So we can seek them out in the environment. And the humans have something very fancy on top of this. It's the neocortex and the neocortex can be seen as something like an extension of the hippocampus. The neocortex is generalizing over these situations. It's just as a pattern, what do all these patterns have in common of a given type? So how does this work? And the neocortex is making this model of the world that we experience. And as I said, Minsky thought, for most of his life that we can treat it as something like a database. And I think a better way of looking at this is to see it's something like a synthesizer. You know, when you try to understand sound with a synthesizer, what you can be doing is you take in the raw data that comes in from your cochlea, which is like a physical Fourier transform sent into your cortex, and it looks something like this. This green line here, and then you fiddle on the knobs, your oscillator, this oscillator is made of notes, of course. And you do this until you're able to reproduce the pattern. So once the pattern has started, you know how it continues. And when you can predict the pattern, you understand it. And you don't only do this for the sound, you also do it for vision, like colors, and for spatial frequencies and so on, of course, with a slightly different synthesizer, and so on. And once you've done this, you can build a synthesizer on top of the synthesizers and the synthesizer on top of this interest is going to look for patterns in the patterns. So you get simple presets, and you get phonemes, and so on. And it hasn't stopped there, then you can combine it all into a complete mental simulation that plays out in your mind. And you don't need to stop at this mental simulation, you can also take many simulations and generalize overdose and find the patterns in them. And then you get concepts. And then you can use these concepts for reasoning, and you can transform them into language and talk to other people about them. But what you do at each stage is the same thing, you basically look for patterns and the patterns. There are two types of learning this low level function approximation that is basically Bayesian learning. You can do this Marek many paradigms, but it comes down to pretty much the same statistics. In the end, it's parallelizable, and it models the complete space, like when you will look at the world as a baby for a few months, you have learned the laws of perspective and lighting, and they don't change very much during life. So you know, when object moves and distance becomes smaller, it's actually an object of invariant size. You learn all these things, you learn all these functions. But when we play the world up there, the conceptual world, where ideas exist, and people exist, and politics exist, and so on, you cannot model the complete space, because we don't get enough sampling data and the dimensionality of the space is too high. So instead, what people do is they use a sparse MDP Markov Decision Model. Also called a story. And it's basically if you play the board, like the stock market, we don't model the complete stock market is all the probabilities, we pick a single stock or a couple of stocks. And then we try to see if there were, these are the stories that we believe and if they totally don't work, we pick different stocks.

Joscha Bach 32:11
And from these, all these things, we build this mental simulation that plays out, this is what we perceive of the world, this mental simulation is the world that we believe to be in. And it's nothing like the world out there, the world or there is some kind of computational shithole you don't you cannot live in there, because it's just some weird quantum processes going on that are entangled with your retina and your other senses, and your neural networks are going to try to predict the patterns that come into the sensors. And to do this, they create all this elaborate structure which you perceive. So out there in the world, there is no color, no sound, new people, there is structure, and the structure has regularity in them, and the regularity that you find is projected in your mind. And people find similar regularity. So it seems to be not Whoo. But it's probably not what's out there. It's the functional relationships that you'll find. It's functional abstractions. So our neocortex is an organ that is able to simulate a dynamic world, it's literally very much like a dream, it loses the same circuitry as your night time dreaming only daytime dreams are connected to your sensory input and constrained by it. And to do this, you have small circuits, the cortical columns are made of a few 100 neurons, you have 100 million of them. And I think that they're probably something like a state machine. And the state machine takes care of neural binding. And each of them is a small function approximator embedded in the state machine that can talk to the neighbors and form larger computational units. And once this has a certain size, it's a brain area. And the brain areas talk to each other and form processing streams. And together, they play the music of your mind. It's like an orchestra, each brain area, we have something like 50 brain areas is like an instrument, each of them playing a specialized part of the music of your mind. And they listen to the instruments around them. And thereby form streams language to music propagates. So from the outside these musicians take in sensory patterns and play motor patterns, and so on and back in there, you get more and more integration and abstraction. And you'll find similar structure to this model in the brain. And this orchestra has a conductor, this conductor is not some kind of magical homunculus. It's a brain area like the others. And what it does, it's deciding what's being played tonight, the orchestra can play very well on its own. But if you turn off the conductor, you become a sleepwalker, you can still get up at night and randomly make dinner or talk to somebody but there's nobody home and you and this conductor is doing executive function is resolving conflicts between the different instruments and helps them to tune up or to tune down and so on and change resource allocation and to do all these things. It maintains a protocol of what it attended to. And this protocol is basically your story that the system tells itself about itself. The conductor cannot listen to the whole orchestra. It all He listens to one or a couple instruments at a time, there's no resolution. But this is what he puts into the protocol. And this protocol is the only part where our experience gets integrated. So there's probably lots and lots of experience happening in the brain. But these parts of the brain don't know about each other, the only in this protocol they get together. And when you access this protocol, you remember what happened there. And these situations replay these situations in your brain. And at some point, you also be able to replay the fact that you access your protocol. So you put into your protocol, the fact that you access your protocol, you have this voice in your head, and you start listening to that voice and understanding what this voice says. So now your system is able to remember that it attended to itself a moment ago that perceived itself as being conscious a moment ago. And I think this is necessary and sufficient for consciousness. So we're probably not actually conscious in this very moment. But we do have a memory of having been conscious of something a moment ago. Come to think of it as much easier to build, right? It's not very magical. So what's it with reality. You know, imagination, and our world modeling and so on, use the same circuits. And you imagine something, you use generative models of your brain that normally are used for perception. And to make sure that you don't mistake your imaginations for perceptual stuff, the brain is going to take the imagination as imaginary and the real stuff is real, right? It's a tech that is put on a part of the representations of the look real to you. If this tagging doesn't work, you can tell us the nation's which is kind of awkward. The brain can also take conceptual structures as real for instance, I somehow believe that the financial system is real, even though I never perceived it. And my understanding is probably all wrong.

Joscha Bach 36:49
Method mathematics is very special, because mathematics is just the domain of all formal languages is a game played with symbols. And it has the same reality, I think, as a novel that is not read. So if you have a role that is not ready to just a bunch of characters of symbols, right, when you open it, you hallucinate some story in your mind. And but you know, the story is not real, because somebody has written the symbols into the book. That's it. And the fascinating thing about mathematics is that you don't need to write it into the book, it writes itself, you just need to pick a few suitable axioms, and everything else follows from these axioms, because mathematics is largely discovered, it feels real to the brain. And this notion that the metaphysics of mathematics is real is called Platonism. I think it's an illusion. Reality is, in fact, a brain state. So this leaves us this some sort of final embarrassment. And this is

Joscha Bach 37:49
you know, the Commodore 64, where does it come from? We can understand how we work via computation, we understand the universe, how it works, it's computational, and they don't see a limit to this perspective, all these big questions that I asked myself and I started my journey, something like maybe 35 years ago, when I was in front of this Commodore 64. How is it possible that a system can have emotions? How can it have goals and motivation? How is it possible that we can be conscious? How is it possible that stuff is moving? How is it possible that stuff looks real to us, and so on? All these questions can disappear when you think about them hard enough. But one question remains is what put the Commodore 64 into the void. It's still pretty costly. If you think about it, right? Something must be taking away. They're at the heart of the universe. And we have no idea what it is, we cannot know it because we cannot see it from the outside. But it's the cheapest thing I found to put there. Everything else that you can put there, I think is more expensive than this, Commodore 64 is a very, very large memory. So we touched a number of topics today, we talked about computational universes. We talked about digital physics, and we talked about life as the extraction of negentropy. We talked about the world that is a dream produced by our perception. We talked about the model of cognition is a synthesizer instead of symbolic system. And he talked about the conductor theory of consciousness, and about the reason for entropy. And that we will all die. It's quite a bunch of stuff for an hour. We have a lead of a party have a little bit of time left, because I've been talking extremely fast. There's one thing that has has been puzzling me for a long time. And this is the thing that has been left. You know, when racialism came along in the 17th century. People felt a revulsion to it because in a rationalist universe there is no room for love and meaning but free to come from. I mean, it's so perspective in this rationalist world, we are just moving bits of rocks or computational machines or whatever. How is it possible that anything is meaningful? How is it possible that there is a purpose? How is there space for the sacred. And as a result, we got romanticism and romanticism is basically the fight against rationalism for love. We don't you want to keep this thing in the universe, the sense of meaning of connection to something that is beyond what is it? How can that be feel this, there is something going on there, right. And I think it has an easy explanation. And this explanation is part of evolution, you know, we are subject to multi level selection. Inside of our organization, there's going to be competition between individual cells. And they form together a group, and this group is the organism and this organism is competing with other organisms. And these organisms, in turn are forming groups, small populations, and they're competing with other populations. So we have levels and levels and levels of competition going on, and

Joscha Bach 41:00
mutation and selection, right. But the interesting thing is that these levels, they are opposing forces, if you have these cells in the organism, or the people in the group, if one of these cells is not an altruist, but it's super egotistical interest cheats, and basically is not an angel but uses all the resources that the angels give us. And just free riders, then they are going to have a better time, they have time for getting late to reproduce, and so on, while the angels do all the hard work, right. So from an evolutionary perspective, the angels are not in a good situation. But if you have a group that has a lot of angels, a lot of altruists, and it's in competition with a group of a lot of egotistical individuals, guess who's going to win the group is altruists. So evolution needs to find a solution to make sure that your group is largely comprised of angels. And inside of the organism, it does this by making sure that nobody gets to procreate, except the organism itself. So they have some dedicated cells, our gonads that can reproduce, but our skin cell has no chance of ever reproducing. So our skin cell has no skin in the game, the only thing that can do is to be altruistic, because it's outperforming the other cells for its own benefit, nothing good is going to happen to the second cell, everybody's just going to die. Right? So this is how organisms do it. And this is how statebuilding insects to it. So only the queen can give rise to offspring, the individual worker ants cannot do it. And this doesn't work for humans, because it's so much work to give birth to somebody that a single queen cannot work for other humans. So we need to find something else. And what we do have is something a system that works with punishment and reputation. So if somebody is just freerider, into cheater, we have repetition system, we talk about them, when you punish them, you might even ostracize them or kill them. Right. And this punishment system works pretty well. The drawback is that it doesn't scale very well, after a couple 100 individuals it's over because we cannot keep track of everybody's reputation. So what you want you have want to have is an internalized reputation system. And this internal race reputation system basically uses some of the drives on the social needs, it uses the need to conform to internalize norms. And this need to conform to internalize norms means that you pick up a few rules in your environment when you are young, and you want to be good. But being good, this means you just follow these things even when nobody is looking. You're not going to eat from the fridge of your flatmate. Even if nobody is looking, if you are a good person is not virtuous, it has no you have no honor, if you do this, right, it may be not rational if you cannot be caught, but you don't do this. It's basically the group mind reaching down into the individual mind. And it's also there are some other drives that help in this our need to belong and our need for status that are important for the reputation system, but this need to conform to internalized norms this need to be good is important. Now, the problem is norms is that they are somewhat arbitrary, different societies have different norms. So norms are largely cultural, obviously. And goodness is an arbitrary vector and value space. And this vector gets synchronized between people through MSD largely so you're in a group something feels right. And people pick up this feeling of oh, this feels right, this is good, this is what we need to do. And it gets multiplied with the social status. So if you dress up somebody as an authority as a priest or a politician or as an eminent speaker or as a professor, then you know somebody like me, you will feel that what they say is right, that is normative. And you have a compulsion to conform to this. And if you feel differently, for logical reasons, then you will have to bear some considerable cognitive dissonance, but people tend to pick up these norms easily. And this means that people are programmable People can be programmed to run societal software meme flexes, that are ideologies, bodies of norms, bodies of rules on how to interact. And they can structure the interaction of large groups of individuals. And it's not based on reputation. So it can scale arbitrarily. As long as you can project your norms efficiently. And our societies used to do this via mass media, we can get people to resynchronize.

Joscha Bach 45:25
And this belief assimilation, if you are a nerd, like me, is somewhat broken. So you try to still try to be good. But you don't feel it via empathy. What's the good thing? You will need to do this via arguments, you talk to others, and you see, oh, this, this is good argument. Yeah, this is goodness. So this is what I'm willing to do. But it's hard in this way for us to synchronize this your nation with your family unit, video social group and see this as the intrinsic good. So your direction of the system that's larger than yourself that you can serve your group mind is going to be directed on an abstract world on the metaphysical world and a platonic world, on the transcendental world. And I think this is the nature of transcendence, it means that your meaning your purpose, the system that you are serving cannot be found in this world. It's found in a platonic world. And I think this is why many nerds to art or science. So if you make complicated patterns, this is transcendental. It's a search for meaning. It's pretty broken, and you think about it. Okay, I think this is enough for today, we have 15 minutes left, so we can do some q&a. And I thank you very much for your attention.

Unknown 46:54
Before we begin the q&a, just a quick reminder, if you need to leave, either do so now and very, very quietly, or stay until the end of the slot because you're not being as sneaky as you think you are. As always, if you have questions lined up at the microphones, please, if you're unable to get to the microphones, for some reason, and laziness does not count. Just raise your hand and we'll try to get a microphone to you. And if you're on the stream, just post your questions. And we will also get some questions from the internet. And now let's start at microphone four, please.

Unknown 47:27
Hi. Do you believe that somehow soonish we are going to go through a sort of social output years is where we're going to became different super organism? And if yes, what are the biggest challenge challenges that you see in this process?

Joscha Bach 47:54
Well, we are already one. Our societies are super organisms if you want, but their information processing is broken. And I think what we need to do is we need to build a nervous system for humankind. Right now, whenever academia is trying to work on topics that are only winning by truth, like computer science, you're not going to get a career in computer science, if you have proofs that are wrong, right. But if you want to have a career in economics, and you make suggestions that are costing somebody a billion dollars, chances are that you're not going to get tenure, at least they're going to be some forces that oppose you. And some if you lie in the right way to get get people some money, there are some forces that are going to support you. And for this reason, it seems that our mechanisms of creating knowledge in domains that are policy relevant are broken. So we have difficulty in our societies to find out what's actually happening on the ground, we don't have very good models of the economy. We have very poor models of ecology and so on. And we have difficulty allocating words resources properly. So for instance, with respect to global warming, I think we would definitely need to put a lot of resources into post apocalyptic science. There's this titanic in front of the iceberg. And the iceberg is there. And we put considerable amount of resources into computing the last remaining judicious probability that we may not hit the iceberg. But the Oh no, it's somewhere in the 90s percent, right. And so I think it would be rational to put considerable amounts of resources into exploring the question what's going to happen after we hit the iceberg? How do we rebuild what's left? And instead, most of our sciences that were city planning and economical planning and labor, market planning and so on are predicated in the status quo that everything happens. Continuous as it is, it's insane. And it's because of the systemic incentive. steady said that we the people that are successful and get to the top positions are those that are successful in the coming given system, not in the next system. So whenever a system comes under stress, it's much harder to fix. And we need to fix all these things. And we don't know how. But I think it's possible to fix it. At some level, our brain is not lying to itself at the lowest levels. So nervous systems don't lie to the organism about the fact whether it hurts itself or not. And only if it helps the organism. And right now we have systems that corrupt our thinking. And I think we need some to think about some type of new social media that filters information by truth, and relevance, instead of things that are addictive. So I don't know what this thing is going to look like. And if you managed to build it in time, but I think that to be possible, it's probably worth thinking about.

Unknown 50:58
Could we get a question from our global nervous system, the internet?

Unknown 51:03
Lots of people on the internet, were wondering, what if this is already proven? And what is the stuff you're inferring? So they would like to to provide a link collection or a glossary on further reading? And no, one of the stuff is already really proven known to be true.

Joscha Bach 51:23
I think nothing of this is really proven because there are alternative views of the world. And a lot of the things that I tell you are speculative, in the sense that we don't know if the world is a discrete state machine. And there are some physicists that are reasonable that think it's possible that it is, and there are many physicists majority actually, which think it's probably something else altogether. And we don't know. So what I'm trying to show you is a particular kind of rabbit hole. So particular school of thought, which I find exciting. And I just want to show you a way to explore this land with me. So I do think that these things are true, or they have a good chance of being true. And I will probably change my views on them in the future. I think that they're convincing. They convinced me.

Joscha Bach 52:19
Because respect to mines, I think they're probably the only game in town.

Unknown 52:24
Mike, number five, please.

Unknown 52:27
Hello, thanks for your talk. We're able to recognize limitation computational limits on external systems, like a cat. Cat will probably never understands physics. But as all systems, do, you think that we'll ever be able to recognize an upper competition limit for ourselves, as conscious beings.

Joscha Bach 52:51
Probably be made some estimates in my class, and I taught a class in the Media Lab last year. And so we discussed about what's the computational power of the human brain. And then we estimated that maybe we can take a cortical column and encode it in something next, we kilobytes for the attractor states and the actual current connectivity that it has and the function approximation Pater that you've put in there, and so on, and if you multiply this is the number of columns. And maybe you can run a person on 100 gigabytes if you only knew how, or maybe a couple 100 gigabytes, but something in this ballpark. And it could also be a few terabytes. But we don't know. We also know that based on how long you live, you're not going to be formed with more than like a million concepts, because our life is short. And even if we form a couple of concepts every half hour or so, you're not going to be substantially more than a million concepts before we die. So this gives us an idea about how complex our cognition is, I think it's not as complex as we imagined, because our life is so short. And the amount of data that we get to see is so little. Mike, number one, please. Hey, thank you for your talk. One question arose when you were talking about love, how would the joy to evil the joy to not conform, fit into your model? I think that's largely because you have in groups and out groups. If you have an in group or people that you love, it means that you will serve the sacred through them, you serve this system that is bigger than you that you are serving by it, because you recognize it in the other, the sacred. And this is at the core of love this service. And then of course, not everybody is serving the same God. And there are others that are doing things that you consider to be evil or stupid, the outward members, and if you are surrounded by all group members, is you're going to feel much better if you have vice are fighting back. And being mischievous or being evil to them and so on might be a way to fight against a world that you perceive as hostile and as something that is not part of your group. Just the joy, the joy element is not so much explained. The joy. Yeah, but there is a benefit in aggression sometimes because we are a competitive species, too. Not all of us are, there are differences in competitiveness. I think I'm not very competitive. Don't get much out of this. But you see that a number of people that really enjoy very much winning over others, and there is a joy in winning and breaking the other and being stronger than them and destroying them and taking their resources, extracting the neck entropy from their volume of space. Okay, thank you.

Unknown 55:31
Could we get a microphone number seven, please.

Unknown 55:34
Hi, and thank you for your talk. The idea that what we are experiencing is not what's actually out there is something I read about when reading about meditation as well. Have you come across this concept in this context? And do you maybe even have experience?

Joscha Bach 55:53
Yes, it is. So when you meditate very deeply when you do Vipassana, for instance, you can experience a state in which you detach yourself from your self concept, and from all these findings from your body image, from your perspective on yourself as a person even. And when you do this, you can experience yourself with a third person perspective, if you think about yourself, it's difficult then to identify with you and realize that, for instance, the motives and impulse, they're still there, but they're no longer direct you. They are like a ghost, they're somewhere in the background, your self concept, does not integrate them very much. And this is when you realize this thing that the robots and Westworld realize that reality falls apart. And they're not really these humanoid robots. They're our minds that are more general than what they're being used for. Thank you.

Unknown 56:48
Could we get the internet please?

Unknown 56:53
Yep, draws and wants to know, did any of this research attempts to resolve pathological brain patterns?

Joscha Bach 57:04
Well, I'm not a doctor. So I'm not competent in doing this. But I suppose that many of us when we try to understand anything in the world, we do so because we think something needs to be backed, our self concept might actually be an attempt of our system to the back itself. So at some point, the baby thinks that the world is pleasure and pain, and then it realizes that pleasure and pain is not a feature of the world, but of itself. And then a realize is that it's not a direct representation. For instance, you might realize that you've cut yourself, and that hurts a lot. But it's only a very tiny cut. So you need to downplay this, and you realize it's a signal that it's very strong, it's not objective reality. And so you do this step by step. And at some point, you get to the point where I realized I'm not my values, I'm not this person anymore. And it's a process of reverse engineering, that you make a model of yourself. And when you make a model of something, it's usually because you cannot regulate the disturbances with the existing feedback loops. So something is going wrong, when you are quite conscious of something, it means that something in this area is broken. And as opposed to then nerds try to understand the universe, they deep down feel that the universe is somehow broken, they need to debug it. And it probably means that something is actually broken in them. So as children, their maybe their social interaction didn't work, because they were too nerdy. And they didn't meet other nerds, which in which they could interact in their normal nerd ways. Instead, they were surrounded by humans, and they didn't know that they were they thought they were humans. And this created a lot of confusion and pain. And as a result, you try to repack the universe because you don't find the back in yourself. So in some sense, I think that I try to understand my own pathologies and those of the people that I love and all the other people that I meet, but it's more a side effect. My own goal is really to understand what we are.

Unknown 58:51
Could we get microphone number three, please?

Unknown 58:54
Yeah, hi, um, you mentioned beforehand corruption of data that leads to instability. And I wanted to point out something that I think is a corruption of data in your presentation, you have the need for dominance in one of your slides, that illustration. And I think that is a representation of the culture of dominance that also leads to capitalism and capitalism, isn't renewable, sustainable, economy sustainable? I think that a need should be replaced with need for social stability. And actually, if you look at history and other systems in nature, you can also see that it's not the code, the systems that strive for dominance, that stay alive, but the ones that search for ways to fit into the system that they have at the moment. That's also this need for dominance. This culture is what is destroying our planet at the moment and I think that's really worth mentioning.

Joscha Bach 1:00:01
I totally share your sentiment. So most of my friends are basically hippies. And if you have valley full of hippies, that to ecological farming and dance, and I'm Mary, and next village, you have very of preguntas that are vicious and strong, and Vikings basically that are willing to pillage and so on, who do you think is going to win. And this means that, if you just did evolution run its course, you will probably get something like an equilibrium because you need some way to farm the land, and you will have some that are going to attack and that you need to push back up the immune system and so on. And I think that motivation itself is not adaptive. Motivation is not a cultural construct. Motivation is resistive motivation is what puts up resistance to the environment. Without motivation, you would just give into inertia. And this means you would stay in bed, you will just rot in bed, you get into physics, you don't get up, you will become a blob on the floor. And the only reason why you're not a blob on the floor is because you have motivation, something that makes you push yourself up in the morning and brush your teeth and have breakfast and shower and have sex and all these terrible things that we do ourselves. Because we get pleasure and we do them in pain, and we don't do them. And a lot of people that feel this urge to be dominant, and they get pleasure out of being dominant, and some others don't very much. And what we can change as a culture is how we value this, I think so we can have an influence by saying this is the desired behavior. This is why we want to interact. And this is behavior that we don't want to have. And this means that different types of people are going to get in different positions and different societies. That's my current perspective. It might be wrong, of course.

Unknown 1:01:48
I think that hunger, thirst, curiosity and vitality. We don't need attackers.

Unknown 1:01:58
Okay, please give a warm round of applause.

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai