Unknown 0:00
See? Your questions. First for cheap goals, your mask rougher than the cover resolutions don't really understand anything, even if you only started in one way of seeing them on that statement. And also understanding is required for achieving goals actually were the new reliably. One does not really understand a piece of art one enjoys doing art is not really gorge humans. So you don't really need to understand anything to be an artist. Let's think about whether we should do it all together. Or we should just do the coal power first than the cold like I've seen that wouldn't even let these guys do it without inserting the data or anything else or turn it off and do all the work.

Joscha Bach 1:14
This session suffers from a fundamental problem, I think donut artists are emerging from a family of artists and my wife is an artist. So I see this somewhat from the outside to describe from my perspective, maybe that's useful because I'm more of a scientist. So I'm directed on finding truth. And as we discussed in one of the previous sessions, I think that true sum was our base perspective is the space of all possible valid models. Right. So this is what I'm looking for, and somehow wired But to my mind that I look for this and try to optimize for this particular kind of mental representations. And I give the impression looking at artists when they do something very similar. They are they don't look for schools, or they look for its authenticity. In my view, art is capturing conscious states you can do this with respect to the audit. So maybe as an artist, you don't do very much you just have your watercolors and see what happens. But this thing evokes a conscious state in the audience. And this is what you optimize for. Or it could be that you are trying to express your own conscious state. But the artist tends to feel that she succeeded if she was able to capture that state authentic authentically. And what's not important so much this is the surface of that it's so the elders style transfer stuff that we see in generative neural networks and timeless this bullshit because see, if you understand art and look at this, you will notice that it doesn't capture a conscious state it only captures a certain form doesn't capture a particular kind of content a certain word its likeness. And this is what makes art so interesting, because art is a reflection about the nature of our own mind. So, it says the understanding of artists is different from the understanding of say for loop the understanding of the following means that you understand particular kinds of computations and rules about these computations that particular aspect of formal languages and so on which you build about the model. If you understand art, it means that you are able to be create a particular conscious state or that you have this very strong impression that you create a very meaningful conscious state a particular configuration in your mind. So the goal here is not so much to model the domain, but to get the modeling system into a particular kind of state. Okay, that's it for me.

Unknown 3:47
Okay. The first one to achieve goals, you must represent causal relations, I think it all depends on how complex the goals are. So, I think that's for also the early discussions in the other panels, the more complex it becomes, I think the more helpful it is to to have a better understanding how to achieve certain goals and the reason why you need to have a better understanding is because that is a reason usually more efficient way to do it. So, in fact, a lot of things can be done without understanding, but the more you understand it the more in fact cost effect is you can you can achieve goals, particularly in the domains in which you have very complex environments and very dynamic environments, very complex systems. The more understanding you need to be able to solve cost effectively, trying to reach your goals.

Unknown 5:07
Question 111 does not really understand a piece of art one enjoy says, Yeah, I think I agree with your show that it's an art, it's more about state of mind. And you could argue whether an artist, because really you have to understand or what it's trying to achieve goal. Maybe not explicitly in the way that's normally done in systems, but you have some kind of a sentence about what also makes your audience actually getting the status. And it could be different than your own statement. And that depends, really, I think, also on the artist, what actually the goal is of making the art, whether it's simply making art, because it's implicit goal for the artists itself to make art, or whether it's an S also go of trying to sell the art. So knowing.

Unknown 6:14
So the first and third questions are related in the sense that we have an understanding of modeling causality, and the goal oriented behavior is my goal being connected. So what they do, you mentioned, I think, some goal oriented behavior, it doesn't necessarily need to model fatality or really achieve understanding if it's simplistic enough, but enter, what to focus on more complex goals, they become more and more important. And Joshua, has said a little earlier about in a second point here, that it's important to understand things in multiple ways to really say you have from understanding of the art questions. I think, the last one, there, I think that and this is kind of touched upon also, then, if the goal of the artist is to evoke a certain emotional state in the viewer, then it could be viewed as goal oriented behavior in that way. And that sense, you could argue that does require understanding, on a certain level to do that.

Unknown 7:40
Yeah, I think I agree with most of our previous speakers. presorted, he talks about this a little bit with we have real separate paper and workshop in two days, he went to general purpose AI, called evaluating understanding where we have four criteria for trying to see if certain system understand something, and those criteria are to be able to predict something with respect to a phenomenon, achieve goals, explain it, and recreate it. So we don't think of any one of those constitutes necessarily signals understanding, certainly, if you can only achieve goals, then it may not necessarily mean you understand anything. That's what I would say about that. Also, we have lots of like, especially model free reinforcement learning systems that essentially are sort of reflex agents. They're not modeling any causality, but they're still capable of achieving at least some goals. So the first statement, I would say, is false. You don't really understand anything. I would say that understanding is sort of a continuum. Maybe you typically wouldn't say, You don't understand it, or you understand that it's sort of a binary state. But I would say that if you don't understand this one way, you probably have very limited understanding of it. And if you understand that, the more ways you understand it much better. The art, I'm not a great connoisseur of the arts. So I would say number four, no, because I typically don't enjoy it. Now, I think, as I understand it, the idea of artists typically either to elicit emotion, or to put some kind of meaning in whatever it is that is created. And in some sense, first of all, I think, in most cases, actually, the desert requires a great deal of skill and understanding of a different medium you are working in. So yeah, you do need some understanding. I guess maybe there are sort of edge cases where you can say, well, you know, I don't know how to baked at all, but I will just throw some raindrops at the canvas and I will call it art, which then maybe means that I don't need to understand much, although maybe I understand the arbitrariness of it. But then we can also argue whether that is still art. And maybe the understanding is sort of in the definition, like it's not, it's not hard to if I did not try to pretend that meaning or elicit that emotion. So, and then to understand the art, I guess you could be set to understand that if you knew what the artist meant. I don't

Unknown 10:36
know what what interests me most about art in relation to AGI, I guess, first of all, is, what kinds of art Well, AGI is created, just for their own purposes, if you have a community of AGI is where they create art, and share it among themselves, and what role might the creation of our appreciation of art by AGI is have in their ability to do other things? Again, if he has an AGI that's like no official scientist or something? Would would feeling you're creating art, helping street tivity by sort of giving it a way for it to juxtapose things in ways that hadn't occurred in real life, but might in future occur? Or something like that? I mean, of course, there's a lot of thinking about why humans like art are created over appreciate our, which of those elements are just part of human evolution and history, which elements will be there and future society of, of AGI. There are far future.

Unknown 11:51
I think. This may, I'm not sure this is always true, it seems to be like, it's not usually directly useful. It's appreciated for for its own thing, it's not like you can eat it or anything. Maybe there's, there seems to be something that is sort of

Unknown 12:14
easy to use.

Unknown 12:19
It seems like in most cases, it's sort of maybe a detour from from what you were thinking of like the most direct goal function, but especially for I imagined that we would give it some goal function that feels more directly useful if

Unknown 12:31
your goal is intrinsic reward like she meant he was surprising his measures, then then looking at are they give a lot of it maybe designed specifically to feed those intrinsic reward functions,

Unknown 12:44
I actually regret. So then I would imagine that whatever art they would make or enjoy a sort of side effect of whatever that main goal function would be, which, like you said, if there's some interesting, you know, drive that

Unknown 13:01
I guess I'm not such a fan of utility maximization is the explanation of everything. So if you think of them as being self organization going on, as well as utility maximization, I mean perhaps are sometimes just comes out of spontaneous like, self organized activity emerging in the system coupled with the world or something,

Joscha Bach 13:24
I think you're working on the problem. I think art is a detective mode, quite obviously. It's probably a side effect. If you ever learning system, then it builds mental representations in order to maximize its success at amortize. It's meant to succeed, in our case, the evolutionary fitness function. And at some point, as part of the way we organize our intelligence splitting it between different agents, evolution found it's a good idea to teach us language. And how could it get us to be interested in language languages, not directly observable things, the scenario between speakers it's a mathematical thing, right? Grammar is mathematical. And how can put you get organisms interested in mathematics, you needed to give them a need some intrinsic reward for discovering compositional structure. And once they had this, they became open to parasites, to the parasitic goal of getting enamored with the content of the medical presentation for its own sake. You should not be interested in the content of the medical presentation. Intrinsically, you should only be interested in tutorials. And most people get that right. One is but the artist is on the extreme end that is a person that if you leave them alone, if they give them a choice, they stop growing potatoes, they just sit there in the corner, close their eyes and focus with their mental representations because they're so amazing and important and meaningful and they want to express them and affect others then, you know, musician is a person that is addicted to making complicated noises and tries to strengthens addiction that But this is what aren't actually here. So with respect to AGI AGI, we'll figure this out.

Unknown 15:08
Well, but don't you think that making complicated patterns, helps to implant new concepts in your mind, and then helps you discover the things that gets an edge and for your creativity?

Joscha Bach 15:22
Yeah, but only in as much as it does this, should you be doing it, but are just clearly not like this artists aren't because they wanted to aren't you? Don't you find these musicians that claim complain about society that it doesn't pay them to do their advanced music. Instead, society only wants them to pay them for doing stuff that lets people socialize better, or sell stuff better, right? But it's actually the point, the artist is the person who is addicted to making complicated noises. And seriously, they don't have society, I have this addiction being complicated noises. Could you please pay me for it? And society says, What? Why? Because it's intrinsically meaningful. Right? And I am like this. So it was very hard for me to understand this to unsee, my need for making these complicated noises or complicated

Unknown 16:16
tries to come up with this gesture.

Joscha Bach 16:19
I cured myself and

Unknown 16:25
I think the question is engaged in evolutionary perspective where art comes from, whether that is more because that helps in if it's a product from presumably entities being intelligent, and is it something which helps them to be more better problem solving? Or in generating their ideas? Or is it more to do with the social whelming? I mean, that's completely different. And the things in my opinion on which of those two actually is the reason why art or the order, the idea that we want to make art is in developed, and, and better and artificial intelligence is in the same evolutionary context, whether that been in artificial intelligence will develop the time design. So as long as that is unclear what what the reason is why we want to make art that

Joscha Bach 17:24
I think it's good to carry on social bonding. And If art is intrinsically important, then the critical acclaim of the art itself might make your life harder or easier. But it's really not the point. I think there of course, is a strong incentive for a lot of people that are in the business of making decoration. Ornamental musical origami

Unknown 17:48
originated in pre civilized Stone Age societies, it was integrated in all sorts of social interaction. So the the origin of Mark was more like he said, it was tied in with all kinds of social bonding and social signaling and it's only in civilized societies it gets more and more advanced or becomes divorced from

Joscha Bach 18:12
the utility of that parasite, the parasite sticks around usually has some utility and the ability to synchronize groups by singing or moving rhythmically together is obvious, right? And the ability to want to burn certain symbols and so on is also clear and the utility of signaling status by buying an expensive paintings is also clear. So there many uses of art for the sake of aiming for communication for synchronization, identifying as a beacon for your tribe and so on and so on. Right? That's clear, but for instance, the artist in my family is not interested in social bonding at all.

Unknown 19:00
Just don't need to complete I appreciate anything is encoded in in its utility function, because I do kind of buy into that mode of thinking about AI. And I would think that if we make AI probably we will try to make it do something useful, but there may indeed be things that the AI believes as maybe sort of a circle whatever it is trying to achieve, that is, you know, maybe suboptimal or or there does need some intrinsic motivation. And there may then be things that this utility function response to which we might consider art and an aesthetic sort of appreciation of that question

Unknown 19:49
the question within a question for for some of these questions. So the first one, enjoyment is a feeling or emotion is Have an emotion of a kind of understanding. The first one? And the first question, the word causal is causal the same or different, or can be different from the word dependent.

Unknown 20:22
I will say you talk without question should be enough for another rock to ask.

Joscha Bach 20:31
Let's start with the second one. If you look at the universe that fall, or any universe of bullet points, if you create a universe in your computer, you have some kind of state vector and the function that lets it evolve. And this is not a causal model, because it's not contingent on interaction with something. But when you are modeling a part such a system because you're for instance, on observer, and you only have access to a few of the bits of that system, you need to take take the system apart into subsystems, and the subsystems interact with each other. And this interaction means that there are no conditional changes in these different systems depending on what the other systems don't. And as soon as you have a description, or a system changes conditionally on the interaction with another system, it also model, causal model basically means if system a does something by the interface to system B, then system B evolves in a way that is different than it would have evolved otherwise. This is roughly what we mean by causality. There are some more fine grained things about this, but it's a rough approximation of what causal model is. So I think that the sense for causality can be understood, if you talk about evolution to get to this first part of the question. I think emotion is a configuration in the space of cognitive modes, there are some motivators in our cognition that make adapt our cognition to certain environmental circumstances, for instance, arousal and which controls the speed and readiness of consent and processing at the expense of detail, that there is focus, which can be narrow and wide, or directed deliberately towards condition already towards perception. And there's variance, which is something like the aggregate of your pleasure and pain. And all these things together, put you into a particular space of configurations and certain areas, and that space is what we call emotions. So any emotion is a valence reaction to a situation you react to a situation by changing your configuration in that space configurators at home, that system will compensate you different content system, this becoming somebody different to react to the wealth of different way perceives the world in different way, perceives itself in a different way. This is what makes emotion so fundamental facts, because it's underlies our cognition. And AI doesn't necessarily need to have that because you will just scale the thing to capture some old space because of motivation. Motivation is a configuration change, you could also have a system that doesn't undergo these manipulations, you could also basically turn off your own emotion by meditating, sitting serenely under the Bodhi tree and taking everything in, in a state of complete equanimity, and could still function, maybe you could not function optimally if you also need to run from the tiger. But you can progression in that state, right, can just not optimize it for different situations.

Unknown 23:35
Understanding

Joscha Bach 23:37
the it's the form of understanding if the configuration change means that you react in the way as you were intended to, it helps you to parse a particular kind of artistic experience, if you want to see this in the context of art. So the emotion itself is not necessarily an understanding, but it's a valence reaction. And if the content of not just the experience means that you have to get into a particular kind of emotional state, then this is important. So if a piece of music is meant to make you sad, and you become sad, this means that you understand this particular part of the piece of music. Right? So in this sense it is. But there's more to understand that most of the art is not really to be understood in terms of emotion. So when you listen to a few, for instance, you're looking at geometry that's generated.

Unknown 24:30
If you know that this piece of music is supposed to make me sad, but I don't feel safe. Do I not understand?

Joscha Bach 24:40
I think that's an academic question, because it's a question about how you're using the terms. So I would say I'm not understanding it. I think I can understand what this kind of music is supposed to do, because I can observe other people. But so for instance, when I was younger, I didn't understand techno music. I tried to understand it, but my brain He refused to go into trance. And I understood what it was supposed to do. But I didn't understand that I really tried too hard. But I could not recreate that statement brain are not part of music.

Unknown 25:12
Yeah, not causal question, I agree with your show, but on the enjoyment and emotion, I think emotions are indeed not understanding, but you have two things. One is that indeed, understanding or deep understanding can create interaction. And also, there's something as understanding your emotions. Like for example, Spinoza is very good at explaining. So it is, emotions are from also from, I think, from my perspective, from a large part, in heritage from evolutionary process, and it's the first layer and on top of that, we have extra layers. And from this extra layers, we can understand our emotions. And we can understand how our emotions and drivers what the difference is then between an evolutionary goal and an ethical goal. So from the understanding of our emotions, we can really understand the difference between those and the emotions trying to exploring evolutionary development in an ethical way, from understanding that we can become more ethical.

Joscha Bach 26:29
Let me just get back to this one. I just stumbled onto something cool. Many of you will know, Mary, the neuroscientist is with Mary didn't you know, for those of you who don't, it's a famous philosophical thought experiment and neuroscientist who is colorblind, it's in black and white road only, that doesn't have any experience of color. And Mary learns everything that this they want to know about color perception. So she disassembles brains and studies all the pathways down to the connectome and reads all the psychophysical literature and so on. So she knows everything there is it he's an AI scientist and understands what the brain is doing to generate the experience of read. Yet she doesn't know what it's like, you see, right. So what's the difference between that what is it that Mary doesn't know? And it's, some point is used as an argument against AI, which I don't think it's interesting. But the interesting thing is, what is the difference here? Because there's obviously a difference. And this is the same difference, I think, between understanding the nature of a thing making model of that, which is exactly what he pointed to the question to me, let's now and understanding arguments and that you can appreciate a person property, one means you have an appropriate model of the domain that explains all this phenomenon comes into being to unravel. And you can understand, for instance, what it's like to be a bad from that perspective. But this other thing is, can you modulate your own brain into that particular state, so you can emulate the state of the modeling system. And this requires that you have particular hardware that a particular cognitive system is able to emulate a particular state in which you are in which you reflect on being in that state. And that is actually the difference here. So parsing of art means you get into a particular conscious state, and the understanding of a domain needs you understand what is necessary to produce that. In this sense, it's it's not the same, we don't need to have this model to appreciate the art, if you can retrain your brain is this if for instance, we create an emotional state without knowing what emotions are. And the other thing means you understand what emotions are. And this ultimately led

Unknown 28:52
me to add on that it's, I think, the emotion of of art is very, where do you go from artists very similar that emotion gates to a deeper understanding of, for example, the scientific problem, deeper understanding in general. And again, what Spinoza explained about that is that more different emotions, this type of emotion is the most in line from evolutionary goals and ethical problems. So for humans, it's trying to pursue this emotion is actually one of the best emotions to pursue. And all the other motions, the conflict between evolutionary goal in human minds and what's ethical, nobody sees is different.

Unknown 29:40
Just to respond to your questions. I do think that emotions, I wouldn't necessarily equate them with understanding, but I would say that generally they would imply understanding if it's grounded in some sort of context or event, in the sense that if you could just think of that Even if you're happy or sad or angry over something that really implies many different pieces of understanding relating to that situation. And then within Alternatively, if it's someone has a depressive disorder or something that doesn't necessarily mind understanding to in that same way in terms of causality and dependence, I mean to answer as a statistician, I'd say that causality doesn't necessarily imply dependence and sense that you could have A causes B, but you don't necessarily need a to have the, as you said, boring statisticians answer to that question, but

Unknown 30:46
more than this is time to say. So thank you, folks, for sitting in on this very interesting discussion and asking good questions.

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai