Unknown 0:00
temporal. And the program today will be that my friend and colleague pay one from computer science department. And I will give two short introductory presentations for 15 minutes each, and then our honor honored outside guests, Simon from from Stanford indoor Sherpa from the eye Foundation, they will have a little more time to develop their ideas. And we'll take one or two questions after each presentation. And then at the end, around two o'clock, we'll have a longer two o'clock Eastern time. That is, we'll have a longer discussion about half an hour or so for for questions and answers. So I apologize to start this off. But in the end, we decided to go chronologically, and I'm going to tell you a little bit about models of the mind in English, ancient India, among how how Buddhists in India wanted to think about the mind for their own purposes. And I want to start out even, even a little earlier, when we are born. And in fact, when we boot up every morning, when we when we wake, we have this sense that we are here. So there's a sense of self, and this is real, the baby learns to grasp and pull the toy. And I am able to make coffee successfully every morning. So I have a certain amount of control. And there are other people around and most of what we know, we know from other people, including about death, and in the human animal that happens between five and 10 or so that children get are aware that that life is sort of ends with death. And then that that continues into an awareness that our own lives are not only unpleasant, but also short. And that creates a certain tension with this sense of being here. And so, what usually happens in societies is that belief systems organize themselves around this belief into there is a part of me that I can feel that is continuous that is unified and feels like me, and because it's obviously not the body, that is goes on forever, it must be somehow the mind or something within the mind. And that part will never die, that is good. That is real, that is forever. That's the usual move that you have in traditional belief systems, both of the monotheistic type and

Unknown 2:47
in ancient India, among the Brahmins, the Upanishadic thinkers and and the Jains. Now, what is truly interesting and original in within Buddhist thought is that the Buddha died around 400 BCE or so, and he thought perhaps considering that there is no evidence for anything in us that is permanently good and in real in our minds and bodies keep changing, perhaps we better drop that notion of this core and say there is no single eternal portrait persons what what if we would think about the person in terms of something like aggregates something like today in today's parlance, perhaps libraries or functions or modules are so that can interact somehow to form a person. And the way the early Buddhist went about that, they said, well, first of all, there is this material substrate, there is the hardware right, there is something some physical stuff, which includes, for example, the sense organs, and then the sense organs, when they see something, they first have to distinguish objects. So there is a function within their living Jana that that sort of delineates objects out of their environment space. And in computer vision, of course, this is an important thing, what has to be done somehow right, you have to first cognize object at one point, but then you also have to recognize the objects, you have to put a label on them, you have to identify them as something that is known already. So this is a function which work somehow with memory, memory is not something that the Buddhists have have defined very well, but it is sort of wrapped up in this idea of the Sunya. And then these identified objects, then they cause a feeling tone, they cause a volitional tendency within this mind body system that is either pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. So when you when it's pleasant, you go towards it when it's unpleasant, you retreat from it. And when it's neutral, you're basically stay where you are, stay in stay in stasis, right? And this type of volitional so that the Buddhists try to model volition, but also emotion, sensation, pain and pleasure with this general idea, this aggregate heap of Vietnam and then He's better now, when they become when they happen over and over again, they turn into habitual volitional actions. So, whenever I see a coffee in the morning, I go towards it, it becomes a habit, it is a volitional action, and that becomes a feature of my mind. So, like a groove that is, that is deepened by repeated action, these these feelings and sensations strengthen sort of count up by one, the samskaras that become karmic formations in my mind. And I wish the early Buddhist would have had like recursion and would have had a mathematical model for that, because it would be more easily understand it, but there was an intuition there, that things have to develop over time. And it is truly, that was the first time that I see in human history that the mind was not taken as a unified whole of a soul something, but has actually been sort of analytically split apart in different components that somehow work together to produce the entity that is our person.

Unknown 6:14
Now, to use only five aggregates to describe the mind seems a bit narrow, right, perhaps we need, the process of how suffering arises from ignorance can be better captured with more modules and more functions, perhaps we need 12, or 37 or so. So what if we can describe reality, as it appears to the meditator as a comprehensive list of phenomena. So this was done by a phase in Buddhist thought it's called Abbe Dharma Buddhism, which lasted approximately six or 700 years or so. So it was very successful, very stable. And what the epidemic has tried to do was, they would have organized lists of phenomena of factors they call dharma, that combine in various ways to produce types of consciousness moments. So they ended up with lists of factors of the mind. In Tera, Vaada Buddhism, we have about 82 or so in the service divided school, there are 37, zip out in that ballpark number. And if you look at these lists, they look a little bit like a periodic table. So if the epidermic cars were alive today, they will probably be chemists or something, because in the way the periodic table tries to model reality on the level of atoms in within within a finite system. And that's what happened similar in the, in the Abbe Dharma school, at least on this level. So they for example, the the basic unit was the mind moment the cheetah. So this is like the state if you want to try to model consciousness algorithmically. At one point, if you do it with a computer, you need an idea of a step somehow, right? And for the epidemic has, that might have been the cheetah. And then there are lots of other things outside things are partially outside things like sound, the Reception The scepter, for the sound, but this is also the first time that attention was conceptualized or, and the feeling tone comes back from the five Skanda is also attachment, which is not a good thing. And indeed, our modern models of the mind in AGI are generally do not include ethics. I mean, Simon and Yoshi are going to say more about this. But generally, when you try to compute consciousness, or try to mimic or try to mimic intelligence, you're not trying to build in ethics, at least not yet. But in this case, of course, they were very happy to roll ethics in. And so we have unwholesome mind moments like envy, pride, idleness, and a list of wholesome moments hold some that means conductive to the overall goal of getting enlightened tried in Buddhism at least. So there is something like equanimity which was thought to be a very positive thing or non violence, for example. Also, there are more generic ideas like origination, or impermanence, which are a little bit like a mind like, like a timestamp. Within the process, you need to control the beginning and the end and the duration in between. Right. So they they had to they had this intuition that if you want to think about mind moments, if you think about the mind as a series of states, then you also need to think in terms of duration and beginning and endings are something that's relatively close to, it's sort of comparable in intuition, to how we sometimes approach modeling the mind with computational means. But then, of course, there is always doubt and in this case, it was the doubt of the ontological status of these Dharma that led to the development in led to further developments in Mahayana philosophy. And one of the most important schools in Mahayana philosophy is the yoga Chara school tradition or movement, the yoga chicharrones were basically the Mahayana heirs of the Buddha because they were very interested in again in the mind and in psychology, and in how it applies to the pursuit of the Buddhist way. And

Unknown 10:10
this is a fantastic edifice, and I can show you only a very, very small part of it. The part I'm not going to show you is, for example, the yoga challenge, but the first that thought in terms of an unconscious, so there is an important theory of an unconscious mind 1500 years before Freud and, and, and humans began. So what I want to show you is just the moment of perception because it contains an interesting self reflective move, which I think is important, also for computational modeling. So the idea for the yogacharya code is at that stage, in this particular flavor, everything was in the mind. So there were no outside things, or outside things basically did not play a role at all, everything is completely. So they were considering the mind without any external externalities, without any objects. And for them, so what we see isn't part of the mind, the image aspect of the mind that they called nimitta Bhaga, which is cognized and recognized by a Darshan about them. But because of their experience in meditation, there is the sense that you can observe this process of observation. So there's this mirror within you that observes Aha, you see something which is part of the mind, see something which is happening in the mind. And that is the source and debugger, so something like the witness the witness aspect of that of the consciousness. And because I can now talk about this, there must also be a part of my mind, that sees the witnessing, of the seeing of the mental image. So there must be a witness of the witness and be yogacharya. And I thought about that, too. And they call it SMPT sumbit debugger. And without, with that set up, you're basically done because now you can run the recursion forever, you this, these four things are basically enough to explain perception. So what what stays now is what is important to remember, however, is that these models were built with a very particular purpose, namely, for the mind to transcend. So it's not artificial intelligence in the sense that you try to mimic the human mind, but you try to build an intelligence that goes beyond itself. And, and that's what I wanted to say as a as a little overview is a little open for introduction for the Buddhist side of things. And Professor Wang from Temple University will will give us a little introduction now to unshare for this would give us an introduction about how modern AGI in the last 50 years approaches that in the last 70 years. Pay you have to unmute yourself

Unknown 13:12
all right. Hello, everyone, I will see the topic is a very big career I am not going to talk about all those years. So, whenever we're talking about a model something right, we already we mean we want to keep certain property in a model of the object being modeled. On the same time, we will be able even more some other property is irrelevant. For example, we can say this point is a model Orion plan and some people even say I ever see science as a model of a bird or something like that. Now, if the topic we're talking about is about the human mind, you we want to build a computer model which is basically what AI or whatever we call AGI, artificial general intelligence is about right. Which us event we want to model the human mind. Clearly it cannot be everything. So, in the following I'm going to briefly introduce the five very different opinion in this aspect, you can see that they actually point different directions for this research. Sideways it seems to be a one kind of a self evident idea is to argue that where is the human mind come from? Of course is displayed or produced by the human brain and weight is already taken to be a huge neural network. So that according Quran opinion, you should I'll put it Try to use a computer to simulate a huge neural network as faithful as possible, so as to kind of generate the human mind. And some people even argue this is the most reliable path, because we have access then proof, because they work. So we know right. But on the other hand, there are objections. Besides, the clear reason that is this way, will be very, very, very complicated and may still don't know everything about the brain. Besides that, there is another to me there's more serious objection to this approach is whether that's really necessary. Because a lot of functions and mechanism in the brain, basically, fundamentally biological, because of the biological nature of the brain. On the other hand computer as we're talking about today, clearly is not a biological system. So that we really need to simulate or duplicate or model everything in the human brain. Some people will say that's not really necessary, beside whether it's possible, that's a separate problem, whether it's really necessary. And that's the major objection for this company. And those people will naturally bring us to the next approach. Saying that what we really care is is not really the inside is outside is the behaviors in this school, the personal expression is probably the idea of tone and test. Okay, I think everyone know this, as far as are you interested in AI? Many people outside the field I literally take that as the definition of artificial intelligence or at least that will generate happiness Okay, that is behavior to build on camera system you know, sort of aspects as far as you're gonna see and the only the body it doesn't behave just like a human to that standard you cannot tell which is which okay, but the tools is what within the field I hopefully most of the AI researcher and not really taking pass the Turing test, there is a logical part of the result of a clause also is clearly this is very difficult, but besides that, more or less the same object Do we really have to do that? That is a lot of human behavior as we know that this side, it clearly depends on intellectual capability or what we call it, but besides that, it also heavily depend on to my experience.

Unknown 18:03
So computer clarity does not have a filament expertise No Sir Not only it does not have a body which is that it feels like human also it will not travel human social experts and because of that, it will not you already behaved like a human Are you saying this is just because of the ideas not inhibited? It sounds like a little bit too much discrimination is actually touring himself clearly is aware of this issue yet he has a paper here probably make a career he has a test is proposed as a sufficient condition for being an inhabitant that is if you're positive you will have to say is it negative, but it made it clear is not really a necessary condition. Okay, that is you can still be entitled as an EMA if it does not look like so to me that's a major criticism I'm probably too many other people for example is a well known computer do a lot more much better than human beings. Okay, find some old numerical calculation you cannot compare them based on computer but you have a computer want to show is inheritance, but they have to fake or to pretend to be stupid when going on collusion so that they can fool us that just like us that just sounds ridiculous. So netbrain tall and accessible they will say okay, what really matters what problem Newcastle so that's also Holly jog other people's intended is cool and what you can do, just like for example, recently, the big news are a go bid world champion in tests in call right and also now we have computers which made human beings you many other plays, which is for some people who believe in this they're taken to be a mouse of homes or who the great achievements of artificial intelligence or was that for an artificial general intended answers many people Correct. Clarity this opinion also makes sense. But on the other hand, many people have an opinion now, that's not what we're talking about. Because today's can be ordered by the country in front of you traverse it over them can do a lot of things much better than us. But we still have the feeling that they're not intelligent. As far as the you know, what the everyday sense of the word means? They still there's something missing, it's just too something very well is not enough. Okay, so even for our goal, many people raise the issue that yes, I can play golf very well, but nothing else. That's not what it should be about. So that brings us to the next call me for some people. Yeah, it's not just to do something, you'll need to be able for example, to be able to learn to be able to raise perceive the environment, play your actions, and monitor carry out third act and monitor the progress and take the feedback and maintain wherever necessary communicate with other people or a system bah bah bah bah bah, you'll see this these can go very long Okay, to some people that entirely that actually means you should be able to do all those things. Which again, makes intuitive sense. But at the same time people some other people ask, okay, why those functions? Why not some others? Do one really want to be is everything you say and all of them are called inheritance altogether? Even if that's the case, how do you call in it to win really saying her inheritance is nothing but a bigger toolbox is there anything that you know really unit or integrate those things together? Well, the school next testable we just say that in hardiness, I actually is some general principle. Some people seem to use some kind of principle of rationality some people say is adaptivity or something else? Anyway, they believe there are some general principle where human inheritance it just wants a medical case.

Unknown 23:00
And computer in hybrid as what we call open federal in homeowners is probably another and then we can even people even measure it million times it is Could it be in heavy bands meaning that no group or a company or a country sometimes is taken just to be kind of like as intended and is human to a certain degree? And even any 100 as most people say at least that medieval concept. So what behind knows some people say there's something in common beside those concepts is a more general concept. That's what intelligence is about. Just like in other science branch of science, you have some general principle and then you'll use it widespread the phenomena the capability the function and so on, okay, which I want to find all the causal sounds good and they're also objections toward this school Okay. Which basically goes oh Hang Seng inheritance is way too complicated to be explained. Well, you will see I feel fundamental principle at least in the Nowhere have convinced the rise of the field is they have a field present, which kind of explains all those. So you will see what I have said in summary. This is different from what Marcus doesn't present that we don't have a common model of the mind. In the AI community or even in Asia coming. What we have is we have a whole bunch of them okay, I fully depend on we'll ask later I'm sure your eyes going pride and is model and I'm not going to go present my model because they don't have the time and any other a guys's researcher you will ask they will have a different model. Thanks Hear the difference, or what I want us to address is not in the detail is actually in the goal. It's a word you'll want to model. Okay, we're not working on the same thing. So you'll see that this crestmont What crestmont Will differently levels of abstraction so that the human mind work can be described or abstract at different levels of description. And each will have is objective with its terminology with technology, OSI for them not even touch on the topic of how to build a model. Okay, just to be called each one of them will use different terminology for that. And which one's the good one? That's the conclusion I really want to proclaim today. There is no such thing as a good one. Each of them has a value, but they have different values. Another common misunderstanding is say, Oh, what are your sad is five different reproach. They're just a different way to reach the same goal. That's also to me at least this a different way to reach a different goal. So my opinion is what we call AI or AGI. Actually, there's several different scientific, this claim with overlaps with communicating the internal realm relationships. Okay. But they're not the same thing. A lot of confusion or debate, you know, this question is because of this misunderstanding, or what do you mean by and what I mean by we're not talking about the same thing. Okay. If that's the case, then no wonder a lot of debate. I've no consensus idea. So which one is the right way to build a model? I will say they're all meaningful, valuable, but for different problems, and currently eat over them as also I said, each one of them has is troubles. difficulties, we haven't built any of them, which everyone agree. Yeah, that's the way. We're not there yet. But we are working on it. That's all.

Unknown 27:24
Thank you. Thanks a lot. That was very interesting and very clear. On You can unshare the screen now. We have two questions in the q&a. One is easy. Will these PowerPoints be made available? Probably not. The event is recorded. Or at least Alex said he would record it. And the other is, do you think a Buddhist approach would address our fears of out of control AI? That's perhaps for me, I don't I do not think so. Perhaps Simon has a different idea about this. But I'm, I'm pessimistic that the Buddhist models will mean Buddhist models can as well as your fear in general because you get less. You can get less stressed out too if you practice Buddhism, but I'm not sure if they will help us with constructing less fearsome AI's. I haven't properly introduced pay, I noticed. One of the things he he's the editor of an important journal in the AGI community, the journal for artificial general intelligence. But I think what I always what I always think very interesting is he's a student of Douglas Hofstadter and and if like me, you have read girdle, Escher, Bach, and it came out in the 80s. Pe actually translated that into Chinese at one point, I think this is a particular distinction to have because it is a very difficult book, very elegantly written in it. And from what I've seen from the translation, the translation is also very elegant. Are there any we can take one more question? Here, there's one question for for for pay. Do you have any advice for a temple neuroscience student who wants to work on AGI research?

Unknown 29:39
Yes, it will be a long story. I will suggest you to email me and then we can talk about that afterwards. I also for people who are interested in PowerPoint presentation I just made also you can if you email me I will email

Unknown 29:59
for So one runs, actually an AGI study group read in his, you can you can you can find it as there's a website for that tools, Temple. I'm like a lot. Now like two, there are more questions and we can we'll, we'll get to them in the q&a session at the end. But I would now like to continue with our next speaker, who is Justin wilds, a researcher and developer with the Center for Interdisciplinary digital research at Stanford. Simon works on the application of digital technologies, including machine learning and AI to problems in the humanities. Prior to joining the Center for Interdisciplinary Research, Simon was in the doctoral program at the whole center for Buddhist studies also at Stanford. And he has a degree from Bristol in Buddhist studies. So he's well equipped to speak about how Buddhism and AGI connect in the field of ethics and intelligence Simon, please.

Unknown 31:08
Thanks, Marcus, for that kind introduction, Linda, let me just share my screen and find some slides. And hopefully, hopefully, you can see those slides now. And you're seeing the

Unknown 31:25
Okay, so thank you, Marcus, for the introduction. Thank you, for everyone who's come to join this webinar today in this kind of Age of zoom fatigue. And it's not an easy thing to do to sit for this length of time and watch the Zoom webinars, being my fellow panelists with the opportunity to have this conversation, especially markets for inviting me to speak to the title of Buddhism, intelligence and ethics. As Marcus mentioned, I, my current role at the Center for Interdisciplinary digital research at Stanford is begun as a sort of hands on role where I use machine learning and other artificial intelligence techniques in my daily work, but the reflections I'm gonna offer today are primarily from my doctoral research on traditional thought and literature in Buddhism. So it's only a little change of pace from, from what pays presented for us. Okay, so as you'll see, I have a, I have some reservations about the term Buddhist ethics, for reasons that I'll go into as we go along. So what I'd like to do today is say a little bit about what I think can be said about Buddhist ethics, what is usefully said, how that connects with Buddhist ways of modeling the mind, and how that reflects on in particular, reflects in particular on Western ways of thinking about modeling the mind, and what the and how they, how they interact with, with Western ways of thinking about ethics. Okay. So to begin with, I want to cover a little bit of terminology. When we talk about ethics and morality, and all of these different words it can be, it can be easy to get the model up and mix together. And so I want to just cover this very briefly, because I think it will help to set the scene for some of the things I want to talk about later. It's common to distinguish four times four types of ethics in, in modern thinking about these things, descriptive ethics, which is an empirical investigation of the moral beliefs of specific communities. Usually, this is just gonna be sort of summarized under the rubric of what people actually do. The Applied Ethics concerns what a moral agent is obligated or permitted to do. This is this is what people say they and others should do, to a large degree. The third kind of normative ethics, which concerns practical mean, means for determining a moral course of action. This is moral reasoning. Some of the reasons why some of the way that we the the outcomes that we that are advised are a little bit of pre or proscribed, how they're justified. And finally met ethics, which is kind of like the metaphysics of ethics is the study of the meaning of ethical concepts. Ethical ontology is what is a moral agent, with the possibility of ethical knowledge and so on. And so these terms are things that I'll come back to the process of what I do want to talk about, I want to take a minute before I move any further though, to talk about some things that I'm not going to talk about what I'm not concerned with. I'll try and keep this brief, but I think some of this doesn't need to be to be covered. In the first place, I'm not gonna talk about Buddhist ethics as the ethics of Buddhists. Now, you may say that I probably shouldn't because there's no such abstract entity of Buddhism that transcends culture and people identify as Buddhists. The ethics of Buddhism is an important sense the ethics of Buddhists. But it's important in this connection to remember that ethics is never the domain of one religious tradition or system of thought alone. Buddhism is part but only part of the ethical lives of Buddhists and people, the lives of people across history from radical different cultures. languages and ethnic groups. The approach that I'm going to look at is primarily drawn from Buddha, stone, Buddhist philosophy and Buddhist textual sources. And was insofar as it, as you'll see, come on to the next point, insofar as it was ever practiced in living communities, we don't have a lot of access to those communities or the sort of lived experience of that. So in particular, in particular, I'm not going to talk about what contemporary Buddhist thinkers and communities might have to say. And I want to take a moment to talk about why that is, it might be thought that if we want to know what Buddhist ethical thought has to say that's relevant to modern concerns, like artificial intelligence and aspects of the modern world, this would be a smart place to start.

Unknown 35:46
And it's not the contemporary Buddhist thinkers don't have useful things to say on the subject and aren't contributing to modern debates in valuable ways. That's I don't want to give that impression in any way, shape, or form, but they're doing so in ways that are very different from the kinds of the kinds of things I want to talk about. And in many ways, they're doing things based upon premises that are quite different from the ones that Marcus espoused at the beginning, or Marcus explained and sort of outlined at the beginning, in his talk. The the issue for for my purposes here is that the ethics of modern Buddhist communities and thinkers and this applies as much to indigenous Asian communities as it does to sort of convert communities or Western Buddhism and so on. It's that it's really completely inextricably bound up with western influences. It's difficult to overstate this, it's difficult to overstate really just how modern current Buddhist ethics is. Modern modern Buddhist ethics, contemporary Buddhist ethics has adopted a constellation of ideas around ethics that is, for the most part, pretty alien to traditional Buddhist ways of thinking, This might seem like a really strong thing to say, and I apologize if it if anyone takes it amiss. Well, that's why I want to spend a moment just just explaining why I say that. In particular, these ideas are those that are bound up with severe sort of ensemble of social cultural norms, attitudes, and practices that constitute what intellectuals call modernity. So I'm talking about ideas that, that have their roots in Western way most modern Western way more than the Academy for modernity. One Western way of thinking about the World Bank will include things like scientific rationalism, traditions drawn from German idealism, a lot of a lot of stuff that can find its roots in the Protestant Reformation ideology, the traditions and phenomenology and psychotherapy, social justice and political engagement, there's, it's pretty well known these days, the sort of the roots of the insight meditation tradition, and and the extent to which they depend upon a lot of German phenomenological traditions and so on the psychotherapy tradition, that's something that people are fairly familiar with. I would argue that most what most modern contemporary Buddhist thinking about ethics is even more indebted to the these western modern, quote, modern ideas than is the case would be with the Insight Meditation traditions of the past and the tradition, for example. There are, there are a number of reasons for this. And it's a very complicated history. But it can't, it can't really be understood without examining the role of colonialism and subsequently globalization in the process. And you'll be pleased to know that I'm not going to try and go through the entire the entire story here. Because I'm making such a, I am making a strong claim and, but it's what I do believe it's essential to understand standing many features of contemporary Buddhist ethics. One of them one of the most important of which is a kind of is a pretty defensive trend that's inherited response to colonial accusation, accusations of the inherent inadequacy of Buddhist thought and practice and experience in the context of modernity in in the colonial period, it was in the kind of people to wet the invention of the concept of a religion as a way of other in people. And that's a really important part of the experiences of colonized Buddhists, and to some degree, even referred to as Buddhist communities that were colonizers themselves, or that whenever colonized, all have been shaped dramatically by the way in which these ideas have caused them to develop modes of self prescription. It's a it's a sort of truism of sorts that there's no word for Buddhism in an indigenous Buddhist language. And while it's true that there are many terms, the Buddha seems to sober to self ascribed pardoning in the curriculum in precolonial, Asia, the cultural syntax that's involved in in distinguishing oneself from others, on the basis of things like religion, and culture really wasn't really something that arrived with colonialism. And so an awful lot of it traces itself to this period. And that inherited response still exists in modern Buddhist communities. It's routine to see a contrast between Buddhist ethics and vaguely fiesty views to guessing I've made theistic ethics, ethics that depend upon appeal to, to a God or to some external authority. And this is this is primarily an apologetic move. It's a way of aligning Buddhist ethics more closely with secular ethics of the modern West, and making Buddhist ethics less susceptible to anticipated criticisms of religion and other criticisms of modernity on traditional belief systems.

Unknown 40:26
What we end up with is is a is traditions of modern Buddhist ethics, which while they are informed by Buddhist ideas, they really what might be best described as ethical Creoles in which the vocabulary of Buddhists but the syntax is adopted from the common habitus of the modern world there. And in particular, the tends to be from from modern liberal perspective. The Buddhist traditions are explicitly explicitly aligned themselves with in the modern world. And I want to make the point very strongly that this is not the these Creoles and this tradition is not inauthentic in some way, it's not bogus. It's not. It's not a negative thing. The history of Buddhist thought is one of changing adaptation, in the course of interaction, dynamic that itself is fundamental to some of the more interesting ideas that can be found in the Buddhist traditions. And these Creoles are frequently innovative, creative, generative, they're not bankrupt in any intellectual, much less any kind of moral sense, which you sometimes see playing. So I do want to make that point very strongly. But the fact remains that if you want to find ideas about ethics, that grow out of the kind of picture from the kind of models that Mark was talked about at the beginning of the webinar, you might not find them in modern ways, in the discourse about ethics that is associated with modern Buddhist thinkers and modern Buddhist communities for the most part. I hope that I've done some justice to that idea. It's a complicated idea. But it's probably something I should move on. I'm also not going to talk about Buddhist ethics, as conceived by the majority of academic Buddhist studies, the act of modern modern theory, thinking about Buddhist ethics, dates back to probably the 1990s. And that, for the most part, it's not really much freer of a lot of these hypotheticals using frameworks and assumptions itself. A lot of modern thinking in in academia on the nature of Buddhist ethics, amounts, in my opinion, at least anywhere to most to unsuccessful attempts to identify the specific coordinates of Buddhist thinking on chumps of equitable thought these axes are still Aristotle, Kant and Mill. They're very important figure that anyone familiar with Buddhist tradition, the Buddhist academia will know who stands at the head of this tradition, and Damien Keown, and is very important early works on on Buddhist ethics begin very much from this premise, he says somewhere along the lines of a significant step forward, maybe when we can identify which of these western theories of moral thought Buddhism really belongs to. And I think that's a really bad place this stuff. Typically, what we find is people reading Buddhist traditional texts and thinking about what its traditional ideas and trying to pigeon trying to sort of fit them in with these Western ideas. And This typically results either in reading modern ideas into the Buddhist texts, or failing to find them and lamenting their absence judging judging the system to be inadequate in some fashion as a result. I had. Yeah, there's a lot more that can be said about that had a lot more than I was thinking of saying, but I think there will be there'll be too much. So instead, rather than abandoning them via negativa, what am I talking about? Okay, so what I would like to talk about are systems of normative and meta ethical thinking that can be articulated and derived on the basis of traditional Buddhist thought, and more and the traditions of Buddhist thought, philosophy literature, more broadly, the market that produced the ways of thinking about the mind that Marcus talked about. So I don't want to prejudge the issue about ethics, I want to talk about what Buddhism says. And I want to try and see if I can avoid importing too much of these modern ideas into it, and do it to some degree by by point of contrast, I'm going to argue the traditional Boateng. And again, to be clear, I mean, pre modern, Buddha's thinking presents a very different approach to normative normativity. Really, and meta ethics, so much so in fact, that it's questionable whether the term ethics is really appropriate at all. And this is really largely because it isn't configured in terms of modern ideas about the discrete autonomous self and ideas about the construction of meaning. The ground grounded and grounded and ultimately derived from the Abrahamic and specifically Christian material ologies. And so much of so much of the Western way of doing that is grounded in these ideas and If they do, they're not and so there's a certain information commensurability about it. Okay, let's, that needs to be enough because I've gone too far into this already. So I want to apologize to people in Golden Buddha studies, I'm going to plunge in and talk about some some Buddhist ideas.

Unknown 45:19
There are lots of booths positions, and I don't want to claim there is a Buddhist position or the Buddhist position or anything like that. But I do want to claim that there are that there are certain things we can draw out the glyph position that are sufficiently general that it makes sense to try and construct something on the basis of Marcus gave us an overview of the analysis of the person into its psychophysical constituents, which which is important grounding for this. And I'm going to begin with the where the Buddhist tradition itself begins. I'm going to attempt to articulate a picture that comes out of this be the essential orientation of the bullet project is to be found in the teaching of the so called Four Noble Truths of the noble ones, which people will imagine be familiar with. And this stands at the beginning of the Buddhist tradition, in the Dhamma talk of a battle of scepter, which is held by the tradition to be the what is held by the tradition to be the Buddha's first teaching. So it stands at least logically at the beginning of the tradition if perhaps not, literally, historically. And it's certainly a commonplace in Buddhism, that all Buddhist thought is essentially like a commentary on the Four Noble Truths and a kind of footnotes to Plato kind of work. And the other teaching that's commonly commonly expressed as subsuming, all Buddha's teaching is the condition you're writing the will things but teachers somewhat by the which are lengthy markets did talk about but we'll move it along. So these are the four truths I'm sure people are familiar with. I'm going to very quickly cover some of this. The first truth is the truth of suffering because of dukkha. And this is where we begin, it's commonly said that the fundamental question in ethics is the perennial problem of the best kind of a life for a man to lead. Again, I'm channeling key, I'm gonna get a bit again here, when you begin to take some Buddhist ethics by saying that it's easy to forget that Buddhism is basically a response to the best to the problem of the best kind of life to lead. And I don't really agree with that. I don't think Buddhism is about the best kind of life to lead. But I think that is the response to the Buddhist teaching presents itself as a response to the problem of suffering, the problem of darker the problem and its responses set out in this way, and it's really the concern with me with cessation and remediation of suffering. That is the catalyst and motivating principle behind the normative discourse in Buddhist traditions, not the Socratic question of the good life or the Aristotelian pursuit of flushing flourishing or the demonio these ideas occur is not really answered bus sort of argued for in Buddhism, it's presented merely as an article to be experienced. But the second level of truth does the customer there does give us some idea of of how its how its thinking, understands suffering to be originated or conditioned. And that is in dependence upon lobar dosha. And Mohan These are sometimes called the three cardinal sins in Buddhism or something like that, or they're opposites are called cardinal virtues, I think it's interesting to notice that they're not really any of them things that are considered moral or ethical in. In most western systems in virtue ethics, forms of attraction and aversion are quite important consider laudable and moral qualities and delusion is typically something that mitigates our culpability, when in other respects when it's present, it's not something that we're held to be culpable for and most traditional ways of thinking about this kind of thing. It's a in fact a condition that obscures the essentially free and discreet nature of the moral agent in the more in the modernist project. The third truth is that cessation of suffering can be achieved, but they're in cessation of suffering when there is a cessation of the underestimation of the conditions that engender it. And the fourth thing is declares the path to the cessation of dukkha, the so called Eightfold Noble Path or the Noble Ones, this is where we started to get into things that are genuinely normative in the Buddhist tradition. There are many understandings of the path, the Eightfold Noble Path. In fact, there are some reason to think that many traditional Buddhist communities, it wasn't even the most important way of analyzing it. It has come to us as the way of analyzing the Buddhist path. And it represents the same insights as the various other different paths, schemas that you find in Buddhism. And it's traditionally I've just pinched this from a textbook. This is traditionally outlined in this way and the eight limbs of the path, and they're often grouped in this fashion. It's important to emphasize that the eight limbs aren't virtues much less of their duties or rights. They are rubrics or, or perhaps aspects or domains of behavior in action. It's common to divide the Eightfold Path things in morality, meditation and insight, or something like that wisdom here, so called three trainings. But to do so is to risk neglecting the fundamentally normative character of all eight But there's nothing. It's not that that there is in some sense, the morality part is normative and the other parts morality is a poor translation for cielo really.

Unknown 50:11
The history of Buddhist studies is a history of people looking for terms like what it where is the Buddhist term for morality and sealer is probably the best candidate. But that doesn't mean it's a good fit. In fact, the difficulty of finding a good fit for translation for the term morality in the Buddhist corpus is itself kind of a bit a bit telling I think it's a it's a really is more about

Unknown 50:35
constraints and things of that time. And so yeah, so the point I want to make here anyways, that the

Unknown 50:43
is it dividing into this wave makes it look like right speech, right? Right Action and right livelihood are somehow the moral part of the path and the others are somehow not connected with morality. Really, what we're looking at here is an entire system of normativity, where there isn't a differentiation, differentiation made in the normative status bit of, of the three different parts of the path. So the reason for this is the basic metaphysical orientation of Buddhist thought, the crucial aspect of which is the teaching of the condition deriving award themes or, more loosely perhaps the the principle of thoroughgoing interdependence, something along those lines. On this account, every constituent of existence is bound up inextricably with innumerable other events and phenomena, on which is entirely dependent and which in turn convictions. Throughout Buddhist philosophy, there is a healthy appreciation for the ineluctable complexity of this relationship. And this is true for matters which has normative significance as it is for any others. Again, I'm gonna, I want to really want to undermine the distinction between things that are considered within the public domain of normativity and Buddhism and those that are not. Normative reasoning is highly contingent in a world like this, and it's a complicated endeavor, which much attempt to engage with this level of conditionality. And this is the reason why it was one reason why attempts to derive some kind of independent objective or kind of coke context free calculus, whether it's on the basis of motivation of character of the nature or consequences of action, or the traditional ways in which people in which Western traditions have tried to find a generalizable principle on which to conduct normative relations. This is this is a Buddhist answer to why that's why it doesn't really work. The complex understanding of causality and conditionality requires theory a sophisticated theory of action, and in Buddhist thought, this firm is taken up by the teaching of karma. The theory of action is foundational to any any account of normative reasoning. And the Buddhist account of karma has, is poorly understood very often, but has very big important differences from from ways we think about action typically, and they will become clear on this is just some some aspects of karma I don't want to claim on presenting future karma or cool, but um, it's doesn't mean action first and foremost, and subsequently that sense of return the results or consequences of an action, as people probably know, in the complex and overdetermined web of causes and conditions that give rise to our experience, all phenomenon, including actions themselves are part of our impact the consequences of at least one in generally more than one action. And every action causes, causes and conditions many consequences. So it's a very, it's pretty much an overdetermined system. From that point of view, there's, there's very little simplicity that can be abstracted. There is no distinction or quarter of quality or kind to be made between, with respect to actions or consequences, which will be considered morally significant or ethical significant. Again, this domain is not distinct. The genealogy of the sort of distinction of a domain of ethics in in Western thought is quite an interesting one, it's, it's not really present in the Greek way of thinking about it the use of the good for a good knife or a good a good athlete or whatever is not different from the sort of sensitive carries for a good person. And then that comes that comes later really with the the new politeness. So we have claps between the boundary of the normative domain and the rest of our experience and activity. And it kind of lives the same thing with normative reasoning the different from any other kinds of Prudential reasoning or standard reasoning. Actions are typically analyzed into three parts. According to karma. There's an intention. There's the the act itself, a content the consequence of an act. Bringing about or failing to bring about its intended result in each of these is significant in the sense that it has consequences to intend to harm or benefit someone has consequences to act or to not act on that intention as consequences and to succeed or fail in that act to impact harm or benefit, or failed or harm or benefit someone has also has consequences and these consequences are not situational. actions which lead to positive consequences cannot nullify the consequences of prior actions, not acting on intention to harm, for example, does not have somehow canceled out the consequences of intending to harm. It's quite an important point, there is no sort of bank balance thing going on here.

Unknown 55:13
One of the most important times of consequences we can have a bad intention powerpod means effect it has on future on reinforcing the ways in which the future actions are engendered in particular, and so special, special attention is paid in, in Buddhist psychology. To, to the way that works, this is an aside the position Marcus Outler described with respect to the epidemic is the first and perhaps most in some way, the most important book of the number picked to go is the Dharma Sangha. And it's interesting that the first western translation of that text was entitled, Buddhist psychological ethics. That's not a very popular translation anymore, but I think, I think it does, it does underlie an appreciation on the part of veterans, or at least anyway, the sense in which we're talking about in a certain sense, sort of normative dynamics that are that are instantiated, sort of, at the psychological level.

Unknown 56:10
Okay. So obviously, the big elephant in the room is not self. So the particular teaching of not self teaching that there is no as Mark has described, there's nothing over and over and above the, the, the the analysis of the psychophysical person constituents and the psychophysical personality that were described in the first few slides. This is a teaching that is formulated in distinction with the sort of, as Marcus again mentioned the proto Hindu, the rabbinical idea of Artman. This is based on the idea that behind the everyday world of change in illusion, that was my our there is a true ground of reality is eternal, somehow distinction, it's an absolute, this is the Brafman, the Atman is Are these our true self, in the sense that again, as Marcus covered most of this but the will of the Buddha's position is formulated specifically in distinction with the Hindu notion of enlightenment. Of course, it is very different from Western ways of thinking about the self, and about agency and contrasting it is one of the best ways contrasting those two is one of the best ways that we can think about the best way you can come to understand the definition of no self really is. So, in western accounts of pretty much all kinds agency is taken both serve axiomatically and actually logically to be a property of individual moral actors, with the result that the central concern of ethical reasoning and analysis is the notion of individual responsibility. A moral agent autonomously forms relationships with external others, which may or may not be themselves moral agents. And the nature of these relationships and the way in which they are formed determines how they can be judged. In theistic systems, this will typically have quite a place for a relation with form with the other that is, that is the divine such ethical systems, commonly developed rules or principles for how individuals should develop these external relations. These principles are typically generalized, or universalized. Pardon me generalizing how relations should be constituted regardless of who the self or the other may be, the situation with uniqueness is subordinated to the nature of the relation. For example, a system of thinking and ethic ethical system this on this grounds might state that an individual should treat others as if they were themselves. Because of because of its tendency to universalize external integrity, this kind of view, where ethics is a matter of the integrity of External Relations, it requires respect for the rights of others. This is also a concept that's, that's pretty alien in turn into pre modern contexts. The moral subject in on this view, moves from situation to situation and have different relations, and therefore different rights and responsibilities in the situation but endures through these changes the same moral subject. There are some challenges that were that were familiar with the history of Western thought on the subject, there is a clear and straightforward distinction here between the internal and external worlds, and this engenders the problem of Free Will the distinction between the actor and the world upon which she acts on which act upon her is, engenders the questions of where and to what extent does there exist an autonomous agent, an economist asked me to the agent such that moral choices can be made, without without free and discreet actor. What sense can we make moral choices? egoism and altruism are genuine polarities on the system that need to be rationalized is the if it's the foundation for all interests, self interest, insofar as it makes sense to speak of other kinds of or locations for interest and leads to be explicated as being derivative of self interest. These are these are the problems that we're all familiar with, wrestling with in moral philosophy classes if you have taken those two to act morally In a situation of this kind is to make an assessment of a situation which constitutes a factual determination and then to determine a behavior on the basis of a value judgment. Sometimes the gap between these two as the people might know is typically referred to as the is or gap requires an invocation of a system of values of some kind to avoid what's what's known as the naturalistic fallacy. The normative decision may be made in various ways and may involve a calculation of benefits and harms, for example, as in utilitarianism may involve an imaginative act of putting oneself in another's shoes. That's a golden rule kind of way of thinking, or may involve a more legalistic analysis simply of applying a general rule of goodness or fairness to the particular case if we find in Kant's notions of the categorical imperative and things of that kind. So these axioms and tensions and polarities are at the heart of Western ethical thought, even where they remain unspoken and even whether it's rejected, they typically set the terms of the debate even if they rejected as, as operative principles. And traditional Buddhism doesn't really speak to the to these true these problems directly at all. And this is the this is one of the one of the sort of causes of the accusation that was thought on the subject is undeveloped or underdeveloped, it doesn't have an approach to this kind of stuff.

Unknown 1:01:14
self and self agency in traditional Buddhism is a different idea. It's the Buddhist philosophy going concern itself is analyzed as internally related to others. The other is inherently unconstitutionally part of me as agents. individuals do not connect with others by forming relations by forging ethical relations, pardon me, nominative behave, normative behavior derives from the understanding that relations are already part of the individual. Because the individual is internally connected with others, there's no principle or rule necessary for connecting with them. So that's a it's here, here on the left, that these are dodgy ruinous, dodgy diagrams sweet. These here on the left, we have that sort of external relation model. Here we have a model where things are more internally related, where there's a recognition that things are internal, internally related. But according to the theory of an Atman, or the doctrine of an art, when there is no aspect of the psychophysical individual is not conditioned and not interconnected with at least something. Wherever there is a wherever there is a self is completely interdependent, and in no way independent. It does not exist even theoretically as an isolated agent, choosing my connection to the world. And that's that's this image on the right here. normative behavior in this system is not a matter of establishing External Relations. But instead of recognizing inherent relations, and this leads to a very different interpretation of agency. It's so it's unintuitive. And it's the kind of thing that, that we're not well designed to easily recognize in the way that we wouldn't be ordinarily conceivable ourselves in the world. In fact, you could argue that, that most of our priors and our ways of understanding the world are precisely oriented around the fact that this is not the case. They're oriented around this, this model that sees me as a screen individual actor. But in in the worst model, what is known would have to be known and what ought to be done are much less sharply distinguished. Yeah, we've insight into interdependent relations with others will be realized appropriately, individual articulates itself as part of an independent responsive system, and interdependent responsive system by making exactly the opposite, instead of as an independent agent, creating moral connection with others. There are, of course, challenges to this image. This, these views as well as the challenges here, of course, are that it's highly counterintuitive. And we have problems with things like the notion of individual responsibility, although it does lead us to a kind of ethical naturalism, which is a kind of sense of kind of morality as a science to more than one time. So just to summarize, orientations based on the integrity of External Relations, locate value in self transcendence through the tempering of self interest, or the obligation to practice self interest in some ways, whereas the orientation is based upon an insight into the inherent intimacy and relations locate value in increasing the depth of that insight with respect to a specific goal, usually. So you might have noticed that I've not really said very much about indigenous intelligence so far. And I'm not gonna actually going to correct that much at this point. What I'm gonna say is that the obvious candidates, terms for translation of intelligence in thinking things like would be the HR system, maybe man of Indiana, or something like that these kinds of terms that are the obvious places where we might start to look for a Buddhist idea of intelligence. They don't connote precisely, or even accurately, much of the sense of how the term intelligence is used when we're talking in conversations about AI and so on. Although, hopefully, at this point, that's not too surprising. I mean, the idea of the notion of is to begin with the notion of intelligence and go looking for it, or at least easy analogs of it, in a system to which is not native is to put the cart before the horse a little bit. So it can be interesting in that your stick way of approaching things. Although, for what it's worth, I don't think the kinds of concepts of intelligence that Um, Professor Wang was talking about earlier, are as alien to, well to systems of Buddhist thinking as some of the modern notions of the discrete self that I described as being part of modern discourse on Western Buddhist ethics or modern Buddhist ethics at all. I will defer entirely to my fellow panelists on the definitions of intelligence that are useful for AGI.

Unknown 1:05:23
From my part, I've always been drawn to the idea of conceiving intelligence as skill acquisition, and generalizable intelligence in terms of the ability to acquire skills and ability to learn new tasks. I think that's a useful way of thinking about these things. And so I hope that in some of what I've said, there's a there's a resonance with the idea that growth on the Buddhist path involves getting better at the skill of normative behavior. That it's that it's essentially the, the because ethics doesn't, because it's a kind of naturalistic ethical system of science, a scientific morality is the modern phrase kind of runs a little bit. There's the it's basically, it can be, it's something that can be improved with increased intelligence with increased access to priors and experience in much the same way as we think about improving the intelligence of our models of one kind or another. I will note that in Buddhism, the primary nominative term is Kusama. The, this is, when we're talking about results or consequences. It's commonly translated as good or wholesome. And as long as we avoid the kind of, sort of the religious or theological senses of good and stick to the sort of the mundane sense of good being in sense of fit for purpose, and I think good is original translation. But when we talk about consider in the context of of action and when it glosses action, it's regularly commonly lost in the literature of skillful effect. In more vernacular Valley effects. It's often appropriate to translate terrible or even indeed intelligent as a folk etymology about doing something skillful leaving something Koestler being to click the kusa grass, which is like very sharp Pampas grass, and you need to be very careful to pick it appropriately without cutting yourself instead, to do things. pusilla is to do them with the same kind of care and skill that you need to pick the kusa grass without cutting yourself, because it has a focus on what to focus on what to do, or one of the primary methods of exposition in Buddhist commentary literature. So I want to just want one quick observation at the end. And then I think I'll be in machine learning at least, which I know a lot more about than AGI as a developer, and as a user as someone who creates these kinds of systems. skill in the broad generalizable sense, is heavily modulated by prior knowledge and experience to the extent that theoretically, at least, unlimited prior to unlimited training data can be used to produce arbitrary levels of skill for a system, more or less irrespective of the general generalizable intelligence of that system. In, in, in Buddhist philosophy, a popular a popular theme is thinking about Buddhism and kind of what is what does it like to be able to sense as a sort of totalizing case for many Buddhist ideas, and they put it provides a sort of fertile ground for thought experiments. And in the spirit, I think it's interesting that, among many other things, a Buddha is characterized as one who exhibits maximum skill in virtue of this precept is perfection into insights and insights theory, perfection of insight into causes and conditions, which is to say he has an omniscience that amounts to access to the totality of experience to the fundamental stratum of causality, and the armor that all causal systems supervene upon there's a thinking particularly of the system of supervening causal systems that you find in the suit demanded, and the commentarial public policy commentarial tradition in Buddha gosa. So that's something I just wanted to throw in towards the end. I don't I, I was gonna go through some sort of tie it up and talk a little bit about why ethics doesn't really work. But mostly, it's a recap of things I've already said, I think I've got gone on quite long enough at this point. And I'm sure everybody's really keen to know what you actually has to say. So with that, I'll say, thanks very much.

Unknown 1:09:05
Thanks a lot. Simon. There is a quick question from Dave is wrote in the q&a is the Noble Eightfold Path, a list of do's and don'ts, the primary source of Buddhist ethics

Unknown 1:09:20
was political question. Yeah. So I mean, it's one of many parts structures. If you read any textbook on Buddhism, it's the first thing you'll see and one of the reasons for that is the way that it features in the, in the four noble truths in particular, which the tradition understands to be the place where Buddhist thinking begins, and most western commentators, and most most introductory texts you will find pick up on that there are many paths structures in in the history of Buddhist thought. It there's no particular reason to think of the Eightfold Noble Path was a particularly influential one isn't necessarily for large, technical aspects and for its population. The point that I want to stress is that it's not a system of rules and codes There's lists and when there's a proliferation of lists and quoting in every area of Buddhism and the rules for conduct are no different, but there was no attempt to make them consistent. There's no attempt to make them coherent with one another or across. I think things like the the, the Bodhisattva, vows in the in in Mahayana, are arguably not entirely coherent if taken literally. And there's no, there's no real attempt to make them consistent, or to make them systematic in Buddhism. And I think that's because of some of the reasons I've described. It's not a distinct domain, where, where that can be specified, where these kinds of things can be generalized. It's sometimes described as a particular risk as opposed to a generalist way of thinking about normativity. So the therefore noble path, I described it as rubrics for areas of human activity, I think that's probably the best way to describe it. These are these are areas of human behavior and activity that are picked out as being especially relevant in a normative sense, there are, there is particular advice that the Buddhist tradition wants to give you about how you should do how you should conduct yourself in respect of these eight aspects of your existence.

Unknown 1:11:11
Given that there is another question for you, which you might have seen, type, type and answer back. It's about karma and computation. It's very interesting. But I do want to move on to to your Shebaa. Thank you. Thanks, Simon. Yoshua is a cognitive scientist and AI researcher with a focus on computational models of motivation and perception. He has worked in in Germany and New Zealand in the United States, and is currently the Vice President of Research at the AI foundation in San Francisco. I've noticed your shirt because usually I listened to YouTube videos in 1.5 speed and and when there was an interview with your show, I had to slow down to to 0.75. And then I thought this is this is extraordinary. So I'm glad you could you could join us. Thanks for making time your show. And please.

Joscha Bach 1:12:12
Thank you for inviting me. This is a really exciting workshop. I am said that we don't have much, much more time. I think there's so much material to discuss, even based on what everyone has presented today that we could probably have an amazing week together. Let me share my screen

Joscha Bach 1:12:49
Okay, does this work?

Unknown 1:12:52
We see your speaker view not here. Okay. So it's key to have to press this what is needed to swap on the PowerPoint or the slideshow?

Joscha Bach 1:13:01
Yes. Let's see. Better now? Yes. Okay. I remember the hotkey it was X. Still not used to keynote. Okay. Here we go. By the way, currently working for AI foundation on Monday I'm going to join the cognitive computing division of Intel Labs is principal researcher. And none of the things that I'm saying here are in any way, the canonical use of AI research or by employers. This is a relatively speculative talk, in which I'm tried to present my current best understanding of the topic. In my view, the most important unsolved problem in artificial intelligence is the question of how we can capture meaning. And I think that meaning is best understood as a unified model of the universe that contains the observer. And that includes the observer itself and the observers relationship to that universe. So in some sense, meaning, and compasses, rest, extensor, res, cognitions and metaphysics, whereas extends our being the extended space with stuff and space, rest cognitive is the domain of thoughts, ideas, projections, and so on. metaphysics is the relationship between them and the conditions under which all this is possible, the domain of the languages that we use to describe all this. And typically, when we learn about this division between res extensa and res Cogn returns in school, we get a version of Cartesian Dualism that assumes that res extensa is amounting to the physical universe versus res cognate hands being the mental universe. And this is already fundamentally confused because res extensa is basically a game engine that our brain is generating and most of its capacity as a perceptual model to explain the patterns and our retina and bodies. surface. So in some sense res extensa is a modeling domain, it makes everything intelligible as being a region in the same dynamically evolving three dimensional space. And physicists understand largely that this space is a mathematical model. And what we have out side in physics is some kind of generator that can be described as a complex mathematics and is hard to understand and that the models that our brain is making of stuff in space is an approximate representation at the level at which we are entangled as observer, so relatively macroscopic level that is somewhat Newtonian, and so on. And decoration of this unified model, this stuff and space model and the relationships to the observer, and the model of our own agency, and so on, all generated in our mind, and our minds must, therefore, container solution to the problem of capturing meaning, but we don't yet know what it is. And in some sense, AI has been started as a philosophical project of discovering that or finding that out, in my view, and the practice of AI is largely an engineering discipline that is unrelated to this question, or only very tangentially related to it. But the question that motivated the founders of the field was very much related to this. And in many ways, the true start of the field, I think, was in the last century with Vidkun. Stein, who was the teacher of Turing, and Vidkun Stein's project is in some sense to develop a language in which you can do proper philosophy, which means a mathematization of philosophy and bridging between the natural language in which we think and philosophy and the mathematical languages in which we can define truth. And this missing link between mathematics and philosophy, in some sense, is the automation of the mind itself, which is AI.

Joscha Bach 1:17:06
So what does the mind do? Very, very briefly, I think one perspective on this is that the mind operates a little bit like a synthesizer when it tries to make predictions. We all know what a synthesizer is, right? It's a bunch of electronic elements that you linked together, so they produce oscillations, and then you have a few tuning knobs that you can fiddle until they make the sound that you want. And there's a little bit of experience in learning, you can produce not only a wide range of sounds, but you can imitate sounds as you want them. And if you want to understand a pattern that comes into your sensory apparatus, it means you need to make it predictable. And so you need to build some kind of oscillator from sufficiently powerful elements such as neurons, that you can fiddle with this parametrize them in some way, changing the weights, until they produce a pattern that corresponds to the incoming signal. And now you have basically formed a simple function that is dynamically adapting to the environment and allows you to implement the control model, you start out with this, for instance, the auditory domain, but you can do the same thing and visual domains. And so for instance, model spatial frequencies, and colors, and then you go to the next level, you will build up synthesizers that find regularities in the parameters of the lower level synthesizers, and you get to preset such as for names and so on and Patriot reservations. And you come up, build this up until you find a way to combine all the modalities and then you are mapping everything into a region of the three dimensional space, you have these mental simulations, and then you generalize over the mental simulations of the environment that you perceive. And then you get to concepts. And then you can abstract the concepts into language. This all starts out with individual neurons and the individual neurons in some sense are the atoms of the agency that happens here they have to self organize, there is no central processing unit that tells other neurons what to do, but rather they have been all locked up in the same dark room, which is your scalp and have to get along with each other by linking up and figuring out what to do in order to survive. And the only thing that they can do is to fire at the right moment. And they do this is a function of what they can observe and what a neuron can observe is the electrical and chemical environment that finds itself in so every individual neuron is a little reinforcement learning agent that is linking up with the others and learns an activation function. And the overall architecture in which they are combined makes it possible that the neurons incidentally act as the control system for an organism And the cell is, is already a computer, the cell has pretty much literally a Turing machine built into it, the DNA tape with the readwrite, head and memory. And under evolutionary selection, every viable Turing complete system is sufficient resources will develop a degree of intelligence. And here, I take intelligence to be the ability of a system to make models, usually in the service of control. Intelligence does not necessarily require you to have neurons, every cell type that can exchange messages with other cell types that have types and so on, and they can be exchanged. deliberation can act as a computational unit. And the particular solution that we have as neurons is that they act as a telegraph system, so they can send information in the organism very quickly over very large distances. If you don't have neurons, you will not be able to move your muscles at the limit limit of physics, which means if you were an animal, without neurons, you would not be very competitive with other animals. But running neurons is expensive, you need to metabolize very quickly and a lot. So you probably need to move around to harvest the neg entropy that is stored in other organisms, you need to be somewhat predictable rate, which is difficult for plants to achieve. So plants mostly do their intelligence by talking between adjacent cells, which means that the activation between the cells is going to propagate very, very slowly. And this means that plants have intelligence that is acting orders of magnitude slower than the intelligence than that animals can exhibit.

Joscha Bach 1:21:50
But, of course, intelligence doesn't stop at the level of the individual organism. And it's important to realize the organism is not a thing in the sense that it's out there. In reality, the organism is a function, a pattern, by which we describe the organization of lots and lots of cells, that basically it's a coherent pattern in the activity of the cells, the thing that is real, more or less other cells, but the organism is a way to describe the interaction between the cells. And it's an organization, right, and you can have organization on the level above the organisms. And that is, for instance, the case in state building insects. And it's also the case in human civilization, because we are state building organisms, very literally. So there will be organization between human beings that allows them to interface and build basically, a next level agency, and next level intelligence that allows us to have multi generational understanding of the world. And this idea that we can build a cohesive understanding of the universe is, in some sense, part of the founding myth of Western civilization, which contains the Tower of Babel, the Tower of Babel is a project to basically build a mind an understanding of everything that reaches for into the heavens into metaphysics into everything. And it's a joint project of every thinking, individual and inclusive manner, and the founding myths of our civilization is that this project has failed, fell apart, because the individuals stopped speaking in languages and the different disciplines and domains that were intelligible to each other, the languages of the different intellectual pursuits fell apart, and the entire edifice of building a cohesive understanding of everything into the heavens fell apart. And this went to the degree that even this tower of Babel myths is being understood as something different than a superstitious manner in the sense that there was a supernatural being that was in the habit of creating physical universes, and then it created people to walk around in this and then out of malaise or because of unintelligible reasons, it confuses people and so on. Right. But

Joscha Bach 1:24:19
this is the mythological understanding. And the practical understanding of this most, I think, reflects to the difficulty of building a society or building a civilization that develops a degree of sentience. Building a viable understanding of the mind is a test that cannot be done by any single individual because as a single individual, you're not even going to discover Turing completeness in your life. It's really a multi general, generational task that requires something like 1000 years of an unbroken intellectual tradition. And this happens very rarely in human history. Usually, after a couple of 100 years. There is some kind of revolution And a bunch of people storms, the libraries and the house where the intellectuals are sitting and discussing. And everything starts from scratch. And then it's been built often in a way that only emulates the understanding of the previous tradition, instead of getting the foundations right. So you get scars in this understanding and current Western intellectual tradition has been disrupted multiple times, and quite severely, by cults basically. And it's the recovering from that. And the problem, when you are ruled by a cult, as we have been for more than 1000 years, is that you have a different discussion about the structure of reality and ethics among the elites in the cult, and among laypeople. And since many of your opinion makers and of your fingers and so on, are going to be recruited among the lay people, they might be working this limited set of concepts and this with this strange mythology to begin this, and the mythology is that the card is using to indoctrinate people to follow the coyote and operate in a way that is consistent with the goals of the cult or civilization it is in a Catholic organization. That basically means that the mythology of that card is contaminating the null hypothesis of every single. And if you look at Western thinking, this superstitions that we developed, based on the reading of Christianity of its contain Hebrew mythology, is, in some sense, still, the null hypothesis and the null hypothesis it has been pushed back. So the idea that it's sufficient to use machinery to explain the mind is something that is not the null hypothesis in our society. The null hypothesis in some sense is that there is an external space in which there are greater powers than in physics. And that physics is a domain in which the basically play a game that has been set up by a higher level agency that has created this game in which you're interacting and via your temporarily there is going to be an afterlife, and so on. And while scientists don't believe that anymore, and so on, it is still for our society, the thing in which against which science has to push because it's somehow the null hypothesis that our society has been working on for such a long time. It symptoms of the scars of meaning is that we have

Joscha Bach 1:27:37
some confusion about how reality and mind are related, which leads to the if realism that the world that we experience is in the way in which we experience it, which even has a form in philosophy, which is called scientific realism. Then we have relational theories of truth, which assume that the representations that you have, are directly pointing with some kind of relation with arrow into the world of effects, which somehow exists in the physical universe, which gives rise to a very big, broken basic ontology, because it's very hard to take mental domains and then construct some effect, sexual arrow that points into physics. There's going to be a rift between scientific understanding and scientific theories and personal understanding. And this rift is also in the mind of individual scientists. That is, when you look at the theories that scientists write down about how things work. And you as scientists privately, how they see the world and how we experience the world, how they experience the relationship between the world, there's often a big gap between those two. It's also true for AI, there are very few people that to AI and cognitive science, which realize that the things that are describing is actually themselves, their own relationship to reality. And the conscious phenomenal experience, self identity, mind and agency are things that we all do this, because we have to right, this is something that we are operating with as individuals, but they are pretty much unintelligible to our sciences. And you will find that people in the cognitive sciences as a very reluctant to talk about consciousness, minimal experience, self and identity minded agency. And there are even reasonable people very much at the root of our field or at the top of the field, which claim that it's outside of the domain of our sciences to really deal with these concepts in an adequate way. And terms like spirit, soul, God, incarnation, trans and so on, are basically in the domain of superstition now, even though they want I think we're more or less technical terms that we're required to make sense of the way in which we interact with reality. So we leave the domains in which these concepts have meaning to people that are outside of the realm of our sciences. And it takes a very I'm trying to recover them and rebuild them in a new framework. So I think what you have to start out with is epistemology. And that means that we have to understand that the strength of the confidence that we have about anything needs to correspond to the strength of the evidence that we have, we need to understand what a model is. And we have to understand that we have different types of models. We have models that are built in formal languages in which we have concepts of truths that are defined using grammatical structures, and predicates that we apply using simple games. And then we have perceptual models that are usually built on creating coherence between patterns. And perceptual models are what's at the foundation of what our brain is using to create our intuitive model of reality. The perceptual models encode patterns to predict other patterns, present and future patterns. And they do this via networks of relationships between the patterns, which are the observed in variances, things that don't change and the relationships between the patterns, and free parameters, which are the variables that change over time the variables that hold state to encode variants.

Joscha Bach 1:31:23
So the patterns that we are dealing with in our mind are visual patterns, auditory patterns, tactile patterns, proprioceptive, one's emotional bonds, image generic patterns, they are integrated into percepts, environmental percepts somatosensory cord, facets, which correspond to our body, motivational precepts that correspond to our volition, mental percepts that correspond to the things that we imagine. And they are integrated into mental simulations, which play out in a perceptual space that we subjectively experience as our external and internal reality. And this perceptual space is very dominant unit that we typically call the self, the self is composed out of our somatosensory motivational and part of our mental percepts. And contains the somatic self, the social self, and the personal self. Somatic self is basically the experience of your body, the social self is the relationships that you experience yourself having to yourself and others as agents. And as an agent in a social environment is in the personal self is one that is relating to your short term broker fee to your own sense of agency and so on. We have also another domain, the perceptual space, which is the current world state, this is basically our perception which room we are currently in revisiting what you're perceiving outside of us. And we have a mental state in which we imagined things, entertain hypotheses, remember things and so on that. So the things that play out on the mental stage, we know that the counterfactual they're not currently the case. But they are basically a mental playground in which you can explore things and reason and so on. Beyond the current world state, we know that we can have different world states, I know if I leave this room, I can enter the living room or the kitchen and so on, if I can leave my house, I will be in Menlo Park. If I leave Menlo Park, I will be somewhere else in the Bay Area and so on. I know that the Bay Area as part of California, which is part of the United States, which is part of planet Earth, which was part of the solar system, and so on. So have lots and lots of global maps that relate the local perceptual spaces to each other. And this is basically knowledge. And this knowledge can get extended into a unified world model, which includes ideas about how physics works, how knowledge is organized, and so on. And this integrates my understanding of this world state of rest extends, is my understanding of the self, and the nature of the mental state, and so on. And an important part of making everything happen in my mind is an attentional system that allows me to single out facts and play with them. And just say it's the conductor of the mental orchestra. And it can select features from your percepts or directly on in the mental simulations, and it's being controlled by the self. So you have an attentional self model, which is an integrated part of yourself. And indeed, what I mostly experienced myself is the thing that is on the other side of attention, I am the thing that is attending. And to make that happen, we need to have a protocol memory so we remember the things that we have attended to and this gives rise to our stream of consciousness you can navigate this protocol memory. conscious attention amounts to the ability to construct index memory. release for the purpose of learning of course, and this protocol memory can be abstracted into a biographical memory. And this gives rise to a biographical self, which in turn creates an identity I remember, I am a person that existed yesterday that might exist tomorrow and so on. And this is in basically an extrapolation and solidification of my protocol memory into the concept of being a coherent agent.

Joscha Bach 1:35:28
And the main purpose of this attentional system is to single out the parts in my mind that need to be related in any given context. So I can learn. And it's something that AI is currently discovering. In, for instance, in the case of the transformer, a class of algorithms, that has started playing a role in 2017. And now is basically taking the field of AI by storm and the current years after the for instance, open AI is built GPT three, a system that uses a relatively simple model of potential learning to discover structure in large amounts of text. And turns out that you can use the same types of algorithms to discover structure and large amounts of images, and to combine the two across modalities. And now everybody is thinking about how to make this more efficient, so we can use it on video and maybe come up with coherent models of the universe. So in my view, the purpose of consciousness is to be a control model of attention, you can see this as there is an execution system and low level agent that is coupled to the environment and has to serve needs that the organism has. And you have a control agent on top of that, that is regulating the activity of the execution system, and facilitates learning. And then you have an attention agent that lives inside of the control agent. To speak in the metaphors that meditation teachers often are using, basically, you have a large system that is your body that is connected to reality, then you basically have the big elephant that is controlling that thing. And then you have a little monkey sitting on top of the elephant that tries to prod the elephant this way or that. And sometimes the monkey dilutes itself into being in control. But it's not all it can do is to put the attention of the elephant to go this way or that. And the control agent regulates the behavior of the execution system models, the execution is essentially trained by the attention agent. And the attention agent has to select and traverse the features in the architecture. It's basically a network that learns the structure of the surrounding Environmental Network that it's part of the control agent, is models the control and is trained by itself. So the attention to the integrated model of the content qualities, that's our phenomenal experience in this perspective. And the attention to the selection of content is our Access Consciousness. And the attention to the attentional process itself, is reflexive consciousness is the basically the mechanism by which the attentional system identifies itself as the being the attentional system, which isn't a crucial thing, because it could be something else, it could be just us facing out, or it could be a memory. But it's indeed the attentional system of the agent. And these back and forth that we experience between reflexive consciousness and content attention is what's so crucial for our human mode of consciousness. So let's try to define some more terms. In in the way I typically disassemble things, I treat the mind as the generally intelligent modeling system that we are using to model reality. And it's implemented with a suitable subset of such as a brain. Then we have sentience, sentience, I take to be the model of the agent of itself in relationship to a unified model of the universe, right intelligence, the ability to make models and the service of control. Some of the control tests are so difficult that require the agent to understand itself to some degree, so it understands how its own sensors operate. So it can account for errors in its sensors. It understands how its own learning operates. So it can account for errors in its learning, and basically learn how to learn better, and how to perceive better, how to relate to itself better how to understand its own needs, how it understands its own reward function better. And the self is the model of the agent in that context. So it's the model of an agent as a perceiving attentional, control exerting entity and the neurons are not the agent here at right at that level. The neurons cannot experience anything, they're just molecular machines, the brain cannot experience anything. It's just the machine made from neurons. The only thing that can experience something is the agent model inside of the simulation consciousness experience are not physical properties that are simulated properties, you can only be conscious in a dream in a simulation.

Joscha Bach 1:40:23
And this is something that our culture is notoriously confused about the because we basically teach our kids in school that what they perceive is the physical universe. And it's not right, it's the game engine generated by your brain. It's a simulation. And it's a dream, the same circuits that produce dreams at night, do this during the day, at nights, they are decoupled from the sensors. During the day, they are tightly coupled with your body surface, proprioception and retina. And as a result, they produce patterns that are predictive of what happens on your retina on your body surface on so on. And the objects of that prediction are basically networks of function. And these functions are the things that we take to be the elements of reality. So the operating system of such a sentient robot is what has been called in the book four times the spirit. That right I think that spirit is best translated as operating system of a sentient robot. And when the word was invented, the only autonomous robots that were known for not digital computers, because they were not around yet, they were only people, plants, animals, cities, nation states ecosystems, they will also have spirits, which means they need to have coherent control software running on them. And disk coherent control software, if this agent is around for long enough, and it's complex enough, they'll also contain a model of the agent itself and its relationship to the rest of the universe, which means it is becoming sentient. A Guide is a self that spans multiple brains, right? The our own self spends many, many brain cells in a way and is emergent over patterns between the activity of many brain cells. But it's also possible to create models that don't exist on an individual brain only, but that span multiple brains, and that even require multiple brains to become instantiated. And a god is basic itself that spans multiple brains. And it's a notion that is completely arcane to our current understanding. But in the before times, it was a very natural thing to have gods that, for instance, emerge as archetypes, or that emerge, because you have extremely cohesive stories, or that exists, because they are the spirit of a sentient civilization. And monotheistic God is exactly that. It's the spirit of the sentient civilization. So if you reread the Hebrew texts based on that, you will basically realize this is exactly what happened. At some point. Abraham had some kind of model of group agency in its mind that required him to be ready to sacrifice his child if necessary for that higher purpose. And at this point, we switched from a tribal organization where the tribe is the sum of its members to a state to the state is a function that has a similar relationship to the individual, as the organism has to itself, it might sacrifice the cells for the good of the state, it's a higher form of organization. This is something that is has been rediscovered in our philosophy, for instance, the Leviathan is basically a notion of that kind of God. We now have the, the ego the ego is basically a reward model that integrates the expected reward over the next 50 years or so. And then we have a higher level agency that we all relate to, that is more important than the ego that we are willing to sacrifice the ego for if we are set up in the right way as a state building organism, and we are all selected for this right? Even those of us that were federal, that were individual minds or tribal minds, the Christian cards that came have selected us. Those of us that were not willing to submit to this higher level sacredness usually didn't have a lot of offspring. And for voted out, you have been bred for being religious. It's very funny that our civilization often thinks that people will naturally be religious, that somehow it's a mammalian trend to become religious, there will be some kind of god center in your brain. This is of course a superstition No, we have been bred to have been selected for being voltages and our thought. And this all is the relationship of the individual to this higher level agency and basically this is A perspectival switch from the individual self, to the next level self to the self on this level of the civilization, this is what we call transcendence. And, again, Transcendence is often seen as a mover, but it's actually not, it's really just the switch of shifting from the cell to the organism.

Joscha Bach 1:45:21
And when we interact with each other, we either do this based on our egos. So we look at what are our individual local interests, and then they negotiate between them. And as a result, you get transactional relationships with each other. And there are limits to these transactional relationships. And if we have non transactional relationships, we can do things without keeping the books on the individual level, and non transactional relationships are based on discovering that they serve the same higher purpose, which means she had sacredness, right, and it's this is at the core of what we call love, love is this covery of shared sacredness in each other, which means we act with each other not based on what we personally get from it. But we act on it based on what we perceive as being the sacred thing that the other one is serving as well. So from this perspective, we can now start looking at ethics. And I see ethics as the principal negotiation of conflicts of interest under conditions of shared purpose. Without a shared purpose, you won't have ethics, right? If you want to laughter an animal and you don't see any kind of shared purpose with this animal, you have no ethical obligation towards this animal that, well, if you perceive that you have an ethical obligation, that's because you decide that you do share some purpose, like the avoidance of suffering with that animal, it's a decision that you need to make. So I feel that I have an ethical obligation towards cows, it's not a mutual thing that cows don't care about me in the same way. So I tried to avoid in cows if I weren't eating cows, if I can help it. But this is a decision that I individually have to make, that I basically project the shared purpose into chaos. And same thing applies between people, right, if you are part of the same civilization, then I will perceive a shared purpose. If people don't perceive that they're part of the same civilization. They can be an arbitrary degree of conflict, and ruthlessness between them. And this is not because they don't recognize that the other one is not human. They don't recognize them as part of the same unit of organization is not part of the same sacred purpose. So how can we bootstrap ethical agents, there are some principles for individual rationality that we can discover, for instance, goal rationality, which means you should always pick the best goals based on your current understanding, of course, and then you should act on these models, right, you need to have skin in the game, you should not just make models. But these models need to be directly related to your actions. And you need to update your behavior based on the outcome of your actions. So you can indeed be rational instead of just creating stories for yourself. And you need to optimize your own internal regulation, which means behave in such a way that you don't over indulge in things that would harm your organism and so on. You also need to make sure that you stay healthy and, and all the things that are part of this own regulation. So for instance, if you discover that there is a food that is super delicious, but it's harmful to you, you might want to develop ways to resist the urge to indulge in these foods and so on because it would be irrational to do so. And then you want to optimize the regulation between agents, you want to have balanced relationships with the others that you can negotiate and so on.

Joscha Bach 1:48:56
These principles of individual, individual rationality basically apply to all rational agents that develop a degree of sentience. So it doesn't matter which kind of religion you have, what kind of outlook on life you have, this is something that everybody is able to deduce that you should have called rationality, willingness to act on your models, that you should optimize your own regulation and that you should optimize the regulation between agents. And now the question is, how can we get from this individual rationality to some kind of next level rationality and next level agency, and this, this principles of creating agency on the next level? First of all, you need to of course, have a commitment to play a part in a larger agent. And this means that you have to accept that this larger agent is indeed something that should be there in the world it should be seen projected in there is a coherent pattern, and that you are willing to implement it via your actions and take its perspective. You need to be willing to act on that larger agent before it can give you a rewards, right? Once it exists, it is useful to act based on it because you will reap larger rewards when you're part of an organism than when you are a single celled organism. And, but before that actual organism exists, you just have to pay out expenses without getting a reward. So in order to make that thing happen, you need to be willing to give the things and credit you need to be willing to act before it exists, even if it doesn't exist, possibly, even though it cannot give you rewards in your lifetime, but not only give rewards to your descendants. And then you need to be doing this with the other agents around you. Right. So you need to actively look for agents that serve the same high level agency like address them, support them in that quest. And these principles have been discovered by Thomas Aquinas. Thomas Aquinas is important Catholic philosopher who took in Aristotle at some level realize that is a resource that had been distorted by the early Catholic mythology beyond recognition, and then try to translate this into something that big came in today intelligible. And he calls these principles of individual rationality, the cardinal virtues, and the cardinal virtues are prudence, courage, temperance and justice. So prudence is called rationality. Courage is the willingness to act on your models. The Temperance is the optimization of your own regulation. And justice is the optimization of the regulation across agents between agents. And then the P also explains these cardinal virtues are things that everybody can deduce it's totally logical, every rational beings would follow them. Right? So even if you are an extreme libertarian, Silicon Valley Bitcoin billionaire, this is what you should be doing, even if you don't care about what the rest of the financial system will be doing after you've got all your bitcoins. But now, the the question is, how can you get this next level agency and he calls this, the divine virtues and the divine virtues, he says, have to be revealed, they cannot be deduced. And so when I read this first time, it was very suspicious, because I thought this means that you have eminent scholars with beards that have privileged access to knowledge via talking to supernatural entities via a burning bush interfaces on holy mountains, and which means I cannot question them, but turns out this is not the case, what he meant is, instead of deducing them, you have to induce them, you have to present them and look what happens if you posit them. So if you, if you postulate these principles, what inference can you make, based on when you assume them, right? So he says, in some sense, what you have to have is this commitment to play a part in this larger agent and its reality, which is called faith. And then you will have to have the willingness to act before you get rewards, which equals hope. And notice that this notion of hope that he talks about is very different from the notion of hope that we have in our everyday common language, hope and our everyday common language is the basically desire to have a better outcome or the expectation that there is a better outcome than that you would have otherwise. And in Christianity, it actually means the commitment to act in the absence of present rewards.

Joscha Bach 1:53:46
And then we have love and love is the willingness on acting on on the shared higher purpose with the other agents. And it's fascinating to me that all these things and some sense I did encounter them early on in our culture, and they are nothing that we reflect on, they seem to be somewhat ubiquitous in the background, but they're nothing that seems to be derived, they are being taught. And this is, I think, completely the wrong perspective, to this sense that anything is valid, it needs to be possible to derive it yourself. And this loss of the individual rationality in deducing what's right and wrong, is one of the biggest issues, I think, in our cultural and our society that we are that basically you remove the agency of the individual in figuring out what's right and wrong. And this mental autonomy is, I think, an absolutely crucial part of the ability of the individual agent to play. Its part of an ethical system. Because if you're not able to deduce what the right thing is to do the EU your actions don't mean very much, right? You will be randomly As a racist or an anti racist, fascist, or an anti fascist, a liberal or an authoritarian, depending on where you grew up, and what things you've heard after that, and the only way in which your actions have kind of any moral standing is to the degree that you understand your role in the universe, your nature as a sentient agent, your position in the games that you're playing. And this is the big task that the Western civilization in some sense, gives to the individual by giving that individual agency and this right to negotiate its relationship to what we now call the greater whole and your once used to call God. Okay. I'll stop here and hope that we have a little bit time of for questions and discussions.

Unknown 1:55:55
Thank you. You're shocked. That was a large edifice you were cheering so nothing against it?

Unknown 1:56:06
We have half an hour left? And do we need to take a little break? And look at 23 different questions in question and answers? I I'd say we just take questions and answers if it's alright with you. I will. So to avoid, first come first versus any other thing, I will choose them randomly from these 20 to 3023. And I would ask you to keep the answers concise. The last one I felt was one that one I felt was interesting for your showers. What is the required readings for people that work with you. Also, it would be super interesting to hear what types of project Yoshua thinks the next generation of cognitive scientists should undertake to train themselves for facing problems in the field.

Joscha Bach 1:57:10
I probably should get back to updating the syllabus. I don't quite know what the required reading is. For instance, when I was too young, I read good Ashoka erectus as a teenager, and I learned about piano's axioms and many other things from it. But the problem is that it basically a setback, my intellectual development by a solid two decades, because homesteaders notion of the underlying language of mathematics is a frequent structure for your basic cut good or backwards, it's good to do it himself. And this has confused me in fundamental ways, basically, are puzzles in a go to Azure path that are due to the existence of infinities, which don't really make sense, and are better ways of dealing with that. Some of the important readings in a way, but I don't know in which order to best get into this include the books of Vidkun, Stein, Shannon, Minsky, of them. The most important philosopher of mind alive today, I think, is Greg Egan, incidentally, favorite author of Marvin Minsky, that's also an important thing that is critical thinking you that you always have to, I think, stay, in some sense away from the authorities, there are interaction partners, they're talking to you, it's a dialogue that you need to enter with them. If you read Aristotle, not secondary literature, but by himself, you discover that he gets about 80% of everything right already. So there are problems in the way in which he defines logic. There are that have been to a large degree solved by Tarski and others later. And it's possible to link these different minds over the centuries and see which dialog that they are entering. And to get the literacy to enter this dialogue is a hard thing. And I didn't have somebody to put me on this path. I basically grew up in a big cave full of books and read things in almost random order. And there are many things that I only discovered relatively late in my life. And it's tempting to build a better library and in many ways, said that I didn't have a very good library. Maybe it was also a lucky accident because it meant that I didn't fall into any of the dominant schools too early. I think that there are very few dominant schools that work very well. Good introductory books, to the topics that I've been talking about today might be for instance, Gary Drescher spoke good in real life.

Unknown 2:00:02
Good and real. All right. Another question is by Alexander winter for Simon, what parallels Do you see between karma and computation? Karma and commutation?

Unknown 2:00:23
I mean, it's the nature of computation as the as, as an action allows for some sort of some sort of parallels to be drawn. It's not it's, it's a difficult question to address, of course, because you're inherently quite different things. And they're really not seeking to describe the same kinds of phenomena at all. But insofar as you have an action, and as a result, there's a parallel to be drawn. I'm not sure they were there too much further. Yeah, you have anything to add months.

Unknown 2:01:03
In, I always feel very much that I'm The heir of my karma when I try to program something difficult. But for your shop, this is about Microsoft, you might do my like this. This is from Dave. Microsoft is the is a model of the mind model for AGI that was the topic of your chars first book published in 2009. So you're sure Dave asks for your show? How is self or the me feeling modeled in microbe sigh? Does it just emerge? Or is there a self module, whose installation destroys an initial state of nirvana is initialized with Nirvana and the self module destroys that initial state or

Joscha Bach 2:01:59
microbes if you didn't implement that yet, and microsite was mostly a moving target to start thinking about the mind. It's derived, in large part from the theories of Dietrich Turner, German psychologist, yes, theoretical psychologist, and there is no such thing as theoretical psychology and is basically the only almost the only theoretical psychologist that I am aware of in Germany in his generation. And he was friends with people like Lem and some of the other cyber nutritions. And he decided to basically take the ideas of cybernetics into psychology and use them to build a computational model of the mind. And in some sense, that was the same project as AI head or computational cognitive science. And he was unaware of that, and tried to do it in psychology and psychologists at the time where he started doing this. We're still in the throes of behaviorism, and largely couldn't interact with what he was doing. And he was just stubbornly pulling through. And he also didn't publish a lot in English. And I discovered that his ideas thoroughly made sense. He called his theory, the precise theory was not an acronym for anything, just say it's something that psychologists like, because it's the first letter for psychology. And when you want to make a theory of everything, maybe that's a good letter to use. And I've found that he was very hubristic, and they hope that he could use his simple computer models to explain everything. In the 70s, he was convinced that it would take him something like 10 years to solve everything. And then we would have computer models of the mind that would be at at the human level. And, of course, it didn't work out quite that fast. And I thought, let's do a much, much more humble reimplementation of his ideas that I can translate into code that I understand. And I call this micro site because it's really a tiny subset of the grand edifice. And if we would have gotten to the point where we would implement a self model, the, the idea would have been to basically pre initialize the architecture, so it has priors that speed up the convergence of the agent on models of itself. What we discovered early on is that the combinatorial complexity of randomly combining actions and representations and the world new dress try to move to a solution on how to disassemble the world is extremely large. So you need to predefine in neutral architecture via an evolutionary research process that makes the convergence fast enough. So an individual gets to a good model of self and environment in its lifetime. And indeed, this is the case I think that for instance, cats develop a model of their own agency and their relationship to the environment much much faster than human beings. And it's because they have the same priors as human beings. They just bring them online. Faster, they have a short, much shorter childhood. And so, cats do have a model of a self, I think quite clearly they understand that they are a cat, they understand that they are somewhat different from humans, they understand the relationship to the human that delivers, they understand the relationship to other cats. And it's quite complicated, complex relationships. And it's only possible because the cat has something like a predefined architecture, that only there needs to tune the weights to figure out how this works out in your particular case, maybe fix some bugs in predefined system and so on. And I think this is also how it works in human beings.

Unknown 2:05:36
Nikolaus has a question also for your show, which I think is interesting, because it tries to bring the two sides of our workshop together. He asks, concerning your theory of internal self and world model dynamics? How do you connect ethics and meaning to Buddhist teachings of annata? oneself?

Joscha Bach 2:06:06
At almost this question,

Unknown 2:06:09
how do you connect to who is

Joscha Bach 2:06:11
the recipient of that question?

Unknown 2:06:13
This is where you mainly Oh, for

Joscha Bach 2:06:15
me, okay. So I am not an expert on Buddhist teachings at all. And I think that Buddhism may have suffered a similar accident as Christianity did. The Sanskrit is a dead language, right? The the original texts have been re translated into a different civilization that didn't necessarily have the same reference. And you are the expert here, I am not. Basically, our current canonical understanding of Aristotle, is has been tainted by what happened in between Aristotle and now. So there is no direct continuity. Between this I don't know if there is a direct continuity between the original thinkers that wrote the text in Buddhism, and current thinking in Buddhism, there's also the difficulty when you have a bunch of competing religious schools, that are also economic and social enterprises, that this has an influence on the way in which the traditions, develop the concepts and so on. So I don't know what what parts of Buddhism are unadulterated, which parts are authentic, I don't even know the epistemological principles of Buddhism. And that's why I'm not competent at all and more working in Buddhism and listening. And I find that we end up with very similar concepts of is a big overlap between where we get, and there are many things that Buddhism understands, as given or as very obvious and clear, that are harder to get to invest in philosophy. And one of the important thing is, for instance, the relationship of the individual to the surrounding reality. Right from Western perspective, it looks as if Buddhism is an idealist philosophy that makes the dream primary that you're in and I think that festal philosophy is now materialist, predominantly, which means it makes the physical machinery primary, and then struggled to explain how the relationship to the dream, whereas Buddhist philosophy seems to ignore what underlies the dream, the machinery that generates dreams, the conditions of machinery that can generate dreams at all the languages in which dreams can be implemented, and so on. And because all of this is neglected, the gaps are being filled in by modern Buddhist practice practitioners, often by the stories that are just so stories or that are very unsatisfying, or that are even conflicting with this other epistemologies and ontologies. I also don't understand Buddhist ethics very well, my intuition is that the Eastern traditions very often try to fix the issue of the individual by basically creating an identity between the sense of being where you are right here right now, and what needs to be done. Once you do this, once you are at peace, with your being, so to speak, when you act on what you actually think you are, instead of what you think you should be, you reduce a lot of suffering, because you're you stop trying to regulate for things that you can no longer control. And this is very different in the Western thinking that mostly implemented the super ego on top of the ego that was telling the individuals how it should be so they can be acceptable. And the integrals were asked to work harder than was necessary for the individual. So the greater whole would have more value to operate on. And you as an individual might be paid paid back in the afterlife. And in the Christian tradition, it is completely acceptable that the it your fundamental level self that thing that feels what it's like to be in your skin remains extremely unsatisfied and even confused. Right? As long as you're, this, this existential confusion of the individual does not lead the individual to severely antisocial behavior, it's fine to be confused, be even find this interfering if an eminent professor or an eminent theological authority is someone who is completely naive and right and in some sense, feminine, logically blind, doesn't experience their body at all their relationship to their environment, and so on, on the other hand, is creation of a unity between what you experience you should be doing and what you are doing, has led to societies that did not produce a lot of surplus values direct, we mostly don't want to emigrate into Buddhist societies. And that is a distortion of the mind by Christianity, the thing that you would tell people, you know, I have good news and bad news. And the bad news is, you want to have sex, that's why you are a bad person, and you have to go to hell. But the good news is, God has killed his own design for you. And therefore you can be saved if you work very hard, right? This leads to deep confusion and people into deep amounts of suffering. But it also leads to roads and hospitals into generations from now.

Unknown 2:11:21
I was interested in what you said about the contamination of the null hypothesis, that cults contaminate the null hypothesis. And in this direction, that sort of why do you believe that there is a pure null hypothesis? I mean, do you think that computational modeling of the mind is a is a is a pure null hypothesis, or we're a materialist on our evolutionary understanding, which I share of the way mind emerges? is, it's like been, it's like the null hypothesis that would actually work.

Joscha Bach 2:11:57
What I mean is the opposite. The null hypothesis that we have, when we do any kind of thinking is usually a very complicated conspiracy theory, that you just happen to serve as your peers. So it basically fades into the background, it becomes that what everybody thinks is obviously true. And it's very hard to push against it. Right. And this is very apparent when there is a pandemic, and there's only a bunch of nerds who act on first principles and realize, Oh, my God, we affect what everybody else says, As long as the Surgeon General says, we don't need to buy a mask, we don't need to buy masks, and it's only the flu. So the null hypothesis that the institutions that create meaning are basically correct, that your environment is correct. And the value now hypothesis should be there must be ways in which knowledge is being constructed. And it should be possible to derive these ways and you should be able to do this individually. And what are the elements of thinking that you have to put together to get to valid valid models of knowledge? Right, this leads you to discovering epistemology in the first place, the idea that there is a way of systematically thinking about what can be true that is individually accessible.

Unknown 2:13:16
But it doesn't have a lot of optimism as towards what the individual can do.

Joscha Bach 2:13:20
No, I don't think so. It's our it's your only chance. Because when you look around you, you obviously see that everybody is confused, right. And I grew up in communist Eastern Germany. So. And also, I was an extremely obstinate nerd that grew up in a household of an artist, separate from everybody else. And this was the thing that was my null hypothesis. I didn't know that this was not normal in a way. But what I was confronted with was an insane world where everybody was believing the same things that obviously we're not true. And that is something that has, in some sense, never changed for me. So I always enter basically rooms where people sincerely seem to believe things that coincide with the beliefs of everybody else around them, and especially with their superiors. And most of these things don't make sense. And my own null hypothesis that everybody is either lying or confused, is, of course, mostly wrong. Right? Most people that claim with some credibility that they know something they don't know. All right. But this innate skepticism that I had led me to reconstructing eventually, many of the parts where everything makes sense. And so I think it's possible for the individual to go down to the foundations. And in fact, if you look at the history of our own civilization, all the great singers that parodic Matic thinkers, which means they indeed did go back to the foundations, they tried to reduce things to first principles, and then move out again. And I think that is something that every day integration of thinkers has to do. So we have to get away from this perspective that a scientist can be a person who applies methods. A scientist has to be a person who goes back to first principles, and then moves out to the edge again.

Unknown 2:15:16
Okay, I would like to have to bring in an anonymous attendee who asks for pay and for your show, he writes, or she forgive me for potential misuse of terms. I am from neuroscience, not AI. Do you both believe? Similarly, as Geoff Hinton proposed, Geoff Hinton was the person who basically made neural networks work for machine learning. So very important figure within AI. Do you both believe, as Hinton proposed that we should largely do away with symbol manipulation in order to make better progress with AGI models? Should we do away with symbol manipulation in order to make better progress with AGI? Perhaps pay first and then the Newsha?

Unknown 2:16:15
Actually, in my opinion, here is exactly the opposite. Myself does not school neural network, even though I get a lot of inspiration from neural network, I also go down to machine learning, or deep learning, even though I fully agree separate technology. Okay, roughly speaking, my positive is I think, of all the model of the brain, and all the model of the mind. Now the same thing, okay, neuroscience is the model provide good models for the brain, as I say that you might raise I suggest it might raise briefly, I think is too low level, a group too much unnecessary details. My work is more on a conceptual level. So I borrow much more from psychology, linguistics, logic and philosophy than from neuroscience, even though I have high respect to my colleagues who are working in that field, but they just seem that they're doing something different from mine. The same story for deep learning is a great technology. It may in recent years, bring K AI bike to the public veil. But I don't think that's the way to go to API. My own work actually is a new logic. But I don't also is not a traditional symbolic AI stuff. I say that's also completely wrong. Okay, so I don't have the time with a detail. But if anybody tries to chime in, I hope.

Unknown 2:18:06
You're sure what do you think about?

Joscha Bach 2:18:08
I think that this question of symbol manipulation has led to enormous confusion with the physical symbol systems hypothesis that symbol manipulation is necessary and sufficient for producing the things that our mind is doing has been interpreted in multiple ways. And the thing is that the Turing machine, the lambda calculus, physics can all be reconstructed from symbol manipulation, which means you can make some glass perish period, some kind of formal logical language from which you can recover all of constructive mathematics. And you can model arbitrary things visit and build arbitrary things in it at that, on another level, that is the fact that the symbol languages that we're using a topic, grammatical languages, of sorts, and then we have programming languages, which also happen to be grammatical languages, and logical language, which happened to be grammatical languages. And this has led to the idea that we can use discrete logical language as the right way to implement models of common sense and so on. And this was also in a way what Vidkun Stein had proposed in the Tractatus Vidkun Stein's idea was to basically take our natural language and fix it to make it more strict, more logical, until it becomes a programming language. And then we can use this as the proper language to think and, and now the question was, how can you integrate percepts into this language, and Wittgenstein calls this images or pictures, that tries to find ways to integrate them. And in the Tractatus, he thinks he has solved it, but in the course of his life, he realized that he didn't. So there was a problem to ground that The AbsTract grammatical linguistic models that underlie analytical thinking in perceptual imagery. And this was something that was also a problem for first generation AI. And the other problem that was apparent when people started to implement this is that reasoning, the inference mechanisms on the disk. logical structures are not efficient. Because in discrete logical grammar, every possible sentence among the almost infinitely many sentences that you can construct, if it's equally likely equal to construct, there are too many to search tools. So, there needs to be a way to sort them by likelihood to introduce rates and so on. And this was the thing that basically was has to be solved by different representations that are not analytic that are cannot be easily deconstructed into grammatical structures. And this is what has been done in deep learning deep learning as a generalization of the simple manipulation into compositional function approximation. And some of these functions can be decomposed grammatically. And some of them cannot. But technically all of them can, but not not all of them efficiently, right, you can translate every neural network into a large set of rules. But a large set of rules can become so large, that you can no longer efficiently reason in it. And that happens very, very quickly. So you basically, you can only translate very simple neural networks into real bases that you can reason about with formal logic. And so the logic that our brain is using is a combination of the underlying mechanisms. And I think that pay is exploring this in his own architecture in ours, that is extending into discrete symbol manipulation. And I think that the discrete symbol manipulation has to be emulated by the underlying structure. So our perceptual mind is at some level, discovering the principles of grammatical structure is an abstraction. And the grammatical party, analytical part of our mind is being used to repair perception. So I think we need both, you probably also need to build some priors into the architecture if we want the our systems to discover them quickly. It's also possible now that we have so much compute available that the system discovers it by itself. Thank you.

Unknown 2:22:39
We still have 38 questions unanswered. And 100 More than 100 people still joining in this in this webinar. But we have run out of time. We will not be able to stick around for much longer, I'm afraid. And so I'm sorry for all of you who put q&a in the in the in the in the little textbooks there. I do want to thank Professor Wang. Simon Wiles here Shabbat thanks so much for for joining us. I also want to thank Alex and Caitlin and and Geneva who have been helping the background to set up the webinar and make sure the registration goes right to the to the PRs. Also, there was a it was it was a team a teamwork effort. Sanjoy still with us has enjoyed. So thanks for this workshop. I have learned a lot. I hope it was entertaining and fun for you too. And I'll see you next time. Thank you.

Joscha Bach 2:24:00
Thank you, too, was awesome.

Unknown 2:24:02
Thanks. Bye bye. Thanks.

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai