Unknown 0:01
Hey, welcome everyone. Today we have a conversation with Russia Bach and Stephen Wolfram about multiverse systems. Welcome, Stephen. It's a pleasure to have you here. So let me just quickly introduce the speakers first. Stephen Wolfram is the creator of Mathematica, Wolfram Alpha in Wolfram language. He's the author of a new kind of science and the founder and CEO of Wolfram Research. Your Shiva is a computer scientist and the AI researcher at Intel Labs, with a focus on computational models of cognition in your symbolic AI, trying to figure out what comes after deep learning. So you're sure we'll do an opening statement. And then we will continue with the discussion. The chat is open to the participants, please feel free to ask your questions there. I believe we have James Boyd from the men's team who will be helping answer some of the questions and we might incorporate others into the discussion. You're sure the floor is yours.

Joscha Bach 1:08
Thank you, Tanya. Welcome, everyone to today's discussion.

Joscha Bach 1:13
Date. I've always been fascinated by Stephens work and his perspective on physics and computation and on the entire intellectual domain. In general, I think he is a veritable one person intellectual tradition in a way that he has very early on discovered in his intellectual career, something that philosophy is struggling, just cover business is basically a paradigm change that happened in the 20 century, from classical semantics and the notion of truth as it existed before, to computational models. And so from my own perspective is look like Stephen is very early on in his career decided that mathematics is a code base that needs to have a new footing. And so he set out to work and write his own and turn this into his EXO cortex and as a tool for making sense of the world and integrating all this understanding and sharing that with the world as a platform to explore the universe in a more systematized fashion. And there's a very particular topic and students work that became recently more important, and I think it has always been a prolonged time being in the background. But I've just stumbled on it. And it's a big issue when we think about the issue of why we are here, how life exists, HOW CONSCIOUSNESS EXISTS, and so on. And for me, the hard question is not consciousness does seem to be a solvable problem, and not that difficult. The really difficult and jaw dropping question is, why is there something rather than nothing? How can we overcome the steps? What is putting this machine into the void, this prime mover? How is that possible? What's able to overcome this debt? And in a way, the easiest explanation for this seems to be that maybe existence is the default. Right? Maybe everything that can potentially exist that actually exist. And what exists, I think, is what can be implemented. That's a very particular perspective on existence that maybe not shared by everyone. But it's one that has the benefit that I can translate it into a language and I can only think into some kind of language, it's not necessarily English, but it's some kind of language that is able to form representations. And so when I think about epistemology, and and how we think and how we understand and observe the world, and what the nature of an observer is, I have to think about the nature of languages itself and about semantics. And now when we apply this notion of a language in which the universe could exist, metric will be comprehended in which we can make sense of observations and translate them into models, the envied the step that we say that everything that can potentially exist, it basically means that the universe is something like that superposition of all finite automata. And suddenly, we don't have to explain why something is in a particular way. But we have to explain why it's not in a particular way. Because if all the possible things, why is that some things do not exist, at least some of the time and not everywhere. We basically have to explain structure by the gaps in existence, we have to think about why is it that certain event can have all possible consequences, but only some Why are there gaps in the Vex of the operators, but it's an entirely new perspective and the way and then one of my friends alerted me to a text that Stephen put online last autumn, in which he discusses the rule yet, basically, this he calls it the entangled limit of everything, but it's basically the superposition of all automata. And this, this extreme is in some sense from his perspective or a suggestion. probably clarify this more possible perspective on looking at the foundational structure of the universe. So we have to ask ourselves a number of questions. For instance, why are observers apparently classical systems? Why can we describe ourselves as Turing machines? Or is it that we cannot be is it that we only are simulacra of this, and instead, the actual causal structure is different than we think of causal structure. Causal structure is the way in which it exists in our human mind, low dimensional and discrete functions that are compositional, its algorithms, it's a way to explain the state transitions of a system by a low dimensional and discrete function. And we can make a blow up the complexity of this function, and then it becomes one more intricate and beyond our comprehension. And there is this question at these levels where it eludes our comprehension, just because of the sheer number of bits that we need to make the switch from the deterministic Turing machine to the deterministic Turing machine. I got familiarized with the deterministic Turing machine as a student in computer science. And there, it was introduced as an arcane concept to compute the complexity of algorithms that can basically not be implemented. And it turns out that in deterministic Turing machine, the one that is not just going from state to state, but it's going from a state of all possible states, as it can reach the same states, but the description of this machine is a different one. So the resulting complexity of the programs of the automata definitions for an undetermined Turing machine is different than it is for the deterministic one. And this, if you take this idea, seriously those of the non deterministic Turing machine and use it as a vehicle to describe theories, it's, it could be a new paradigm in the way in which we think about things. Stephen has written a very insightful interesting article about this at some point where he describes the ideas of antiquity in the theories of antiquity as static structures in which we reason about static situations. And then mathematicians of the 16th century discovered differential equations and ways to describe the universe as a moving continuum, in which geometry plays out in overtime changes in this geometry. And what we saw in the last century was the switch to the computational revolution in which we describe the world as state machines that can be implemented as computational models. And much of this revolution was lost on philosophy when the girdle discovered that the notion of truth that existed in classical mathematics leads us into contradictions. And we don't have a difficulty, then we make mathematics stateful. But the notion of stateless and continuous mathematics has changed in a way and the physicists have checked out this code base for mathematics before the updates that happened in the last century towards constructive mathematics. And for the most part, it doesn't matter if your geometry and high level abstract models of Newtonian mechanics are not strictly computable. And you can only approximate them. But when you think about the foundation of the universe, the foundation of the universe cannot be approximate, it must be in a particular way. So in which way is it, and maybe we now get the paradigm because the trick can get there closer. So when Steven writes in this thing that the this century is about to see this new revolution that you described the world using multi phase systems, we can can apply this to not only physics, but also to biology and economy, and maybe the social sciences at some point. It's also interesting to me, can this be applied to the mind? Is it possible to describe our mind is a system that is not just going from state to state, but intermittently to all possible states before the branches, close each other in more nervous state sequences? So these are some of the thoughts that I would like to explain, or to explore us today.

Unknown 9:04
Cool. Oh, that's, that's, that's a very interesting path through through a collection of ideas. Where should we start? We can start on perhaps on talking about? Well, gosh, I think one feature of consciousness, as we tend to experience it, is that we believe we are persistent in time. And we believe that we follow a single thread of experience. And that's a very non trivial thing to believe. Because it probably isn't true of the universe. It is simply a way that we choose to sample the things that happen in the universe. In other words, you and I think that has potentially some significance for thinking about how brains and minds and so on work other words, the I mean to let's let's pull it back a little bit to perhaps a simpler thing to start talking about, which is, to what extent is our kind of percent Question of the world, our belief about what the laws of physics are, to what extent is that determined? By the way we are, so to speak? And you

Joscha Bach 10:09
don't mind me interjecting. So this and please, if you don't want to be interrupted, just tell No, no, no, no, no. What about your favorites? Okay. So this, it seems to me that we don't have a choice about putting the world together in this way. Because subjectively, when we string together the universe, the state of the universe in 12 lines, we do this by observing that some states of the world look to us as if they contain the memory of past states. And this way, we construct our world line or sequence of states to the universe, our trajectory through the universe, if there is no information carried forward, or some of this information is lost on the way, you will never know. Except if we are able to reconstruct the generation of the universe from first principles. But from the perspective of the observations alone, we cannot see that information has gone missing, because it will be drowned, drained out of the universe, right, we will have lost it. And so the question is, to me, if we live in a non deterministic Turing machine, as opposed, for instance, to the Microsoft universe, which is entirely deterministic? What is what's different? Is there any difference for us as an observer, then we would live in an non deterministic Turing machine running Minecraft.

Unknown 11:24
Quantum mechanics. That's the difference, the fact that we observe, I mean, the first level of difference is, I think, quantum mechanics. So So you know, I mean, maybe I should explain a bit about what we now think about how the actual Universe is constructed. Because that's to get to get to the point where we can discuss how minds interact with physics, we have to understand something about physics, I think there's a quite different conversation, which is, once we understand the paradigm that we get from thinking about physics, what does it mean about thinking about the mind, even independent of the physics of the mind of the brain, so to speak? And I think there's an interesting conversation there about, about to what extent you know, to what extent conscious thinking unconscious thinking, to what extent this correspond, these things correspond to single threads of experience, versus multiple threads. But let's start off with physics, and then go to things which don't require sort of the infrastructure of physics, but you do use the formalism that we seem to have developed for physics. So if we if we start off with with, with physics, one question is, so what's our universe made of? And that's a, you know, that's a question people have been wondering about, for a long time, I think we now have a very definite answer. And the basic answer is everything in the universe is made of space. And what is space space is something which unlike what has been, you know, kind of assumed for the last couple of 1000 years, which is space is just this background, where you can put things anywhere you want. Space has a definite structure, just like, you know, a fluid like water, you might say, it can flow anywhere at once. But actually, it has a definite structure made of molecules, and so on. And so we think it is with space. And that space consists of, essentially atoms of space. And these atoms of space, they aren't like physical atoms with protons, neutrons or things. They're just, they're just, you know, elementary points that have the feature that the only thing we know about them is that they exist, and the different points are distinct. And then what we say is, the way that we kind of that we construct the universe is through relations between these atoms of space. So there are sort of atoms of space. And they can be there, they are connected to each other, we can think of it as forming a hyper graph, we can think of it some generalized graph, basically, a network where every atom of space kind of is connected to neighboring atoms of space, there's no, there's no notion of coordinates of where these atoms are, because there's no, there's no sort of background space, all we have is this conductivity information about how these atoms of space are connected to each other. So the atoms

Joscha Bach 14:15
of space are locations, and the space time that we normally think of is the set of all trajectories that information can take between the locations, and locations or places that can hold information.

Unknown 14:27
They don't hold a lot of information. They're just all they are, is, you know, think about them as things whether you UI D. That's all they are. And the representation of the state of the universe is a great big collection of let's say, n tuples of things with UU IDs.

Joscha Bach 14:48
So what was the state changes the connectivity between the locations?

Unknown 14:53
So okay, so let's say the state of the universe is this hypergraph which is which is a bunch of atoms of space, which are just UU IDs, with certain relations between them. Okay? So then we say, let's have a rule that says, whenever we have, for example, let's say, x and y are together, x and z are together, related, x can be anything, Y can be anything, etc, then we make a transformation that x y, x, z goes to I don't know, Z, X, you know, x, y, z, y or something. Okay, so it's just a transformation that says, if you have a, think about it as a graph transformation, if you have a little piece of graph that looks like this, transform it into a piece of graph that looks like that. And you say, let's just apply that transformation wherever we can, to this hyper graph that represents the current state of the universe. Now, I'm, I'm sort of, so that's the idea. But now you've got so the space is kind of this layout of all these atoms of space with all the relations between them time. And the progress of time, is the progressive application of these computational rules. Now, what is, for example, non trivial is that the rules just say, when you have a piece of network that looks like this, transform it to one that looks like that. They don't, there may be many different ways to do that. There may be many different threads, different parts of history, that correspond to different sequences of rewritings, that lead you to different sequences of states of the universe. And that's where we get for the universe. That's where we get our multi-way graphs from, in the simplest form of multi Ray graphs, the nodes of the multi Ray graph are states of the universe. And they are a given state of the universe is connected to potentially many possible future states of the universe that correspond to the different ways that you can apply that underlying rule. Now, that's a it's a very wasteful data structure, because every node in that graph is a complete state of the universe. And the difference between to next states of universe may only be you know, a couple of connections between atoms of space somewhere in the corner of the universe, so to speak. And yet, we are restoring in that way of thinking about it, we're sort of restoring the whole universe. And that's sort of an inefficient way to think about it, but it's a useful way to think about it. So what we've got is we've got this graph that represents the evolution of from one complete state of the universe, to several complete states of the universe that can be branching from one state of the universe, we can branch to multiple possible next states, we can also have merging, because it can be the case that to two states of the universe that were distinct, end up being able to transform to something which is in fact, the same state of the universe. So we have this graph that branches and merges. And every path through that graph is a possible history for the universe.

Unknown 18:05
Okay, so now the question is, how do we experience that graph. And this is where things get kind of funky. Because one of the one of the key features of this model of physics and one of the things a little hard to, to grasp, is the fact that we are observers who are embedded within the system. So we don't get to say, Oh, we're looking at it from the outside, we can see, although there's branches and merges and things like that, our minds are branching and merging, too. So our perception of what's going on is, is determined by you know, how does a branching mind perceive a branching universe? Okay, and this is, this is the sort of real kind of brain twister, which I think is the sort of key brain twister of the difficulty of understanding quantum mechanics. Because I think quantum mechanics is really a story of how a branching brain perceives a branching universe. And so just to just to kind of fill in the many levels of this, but, but an important piece just has to do with the extent to which the laws of physics are determined by our perception of them. And there's a sort of simpler case in the quantum mechanics case, a very simple case in in statistical mechanics and thermodynamics. So you have a bunch of gas molecules bouncing around in the room. And we know that, you know, the second law of thermodynamics, for example, says, when you start with an orderly collection of molecules, the chances are, they'll all randomize and look and be sort of disorderly and, you know, spread out around the room. But the fact that we conclude that second law of thermodynamics is true, is a consequence of the way that we observed these molecules. If we were down at the level of individual molecules, and we were able to trace the motion of every molecule. Somebody might say, oh, entropy increases the second or third analysis true. We'd say What are you talking about or when About as you know, this particular molecule does this definite thing based on this collision, etc, etc, etc. The fact that we perceive there to be this kind of this this overall law, this is a consequence of the fact that we are large scale observers who are not capable of deep of disentangling all the computation that happened at the level of individual molecules. To us, we just say, all those individual molecules, they seem to be doing kind of random things, not the the thing, which would ultimately be at the molecular scale, correct? Not, there are all these computational irreducible processes going on with these molecules that correspond to a very sophisticated computation. We're saying we are computationally bounded observers who just say, we can't, we can't understand all of that detailed computation, we're just going to describe it in terms of this bulk thing of the overall density of the gas or whatever else. So the fact that we conclude that, you know, we can talk about gas laws, and we can we describe the universe in those terms, as a consequence of the fact that we are observers of the kind that we are, if we were observers, who were computationally arbitrarily sophisticated, and operated down at the level of molecules, we would describe the universe in different ways. And a more extreme version of this is the description of space. And, and so the fact that we believe that there is a continuum, that space is a continuum is basically a consequence. Well, at the first level, it's a consequence, the fact that we're very big relative to the atoms of space, maybe atoms of space, the elementary length might be 10 to the minus 100 meters. Well, that's really small compared to the Tandy trying to, you know, with that makes us very big compared to that the universe is 10 to the 26 meters across. So we are much closer to the maximum size than we are to mana, minimum size and that estimate, but So, so the thing that the other critical thing about our perception of the universe is that we believe that we are persistent and time that is, even though every successive moment, we are made of different atoms of space, it is our belief that we are the same us at the next moment as we were at the previous moment. And that we can

Joscha Bach 22:24
see that it's not true, right? As an observer, at least the question, of course, of course, how you define an observer, I understood computation long before I just began to understood mathematics, because I grew up with computers. And to mean space never made sense is the continuous substrate. And you have to make something that looks perfectly like space, or good enough like space in a computer game. But this notion of the continuum that you can fold up into stuff on where you could put stuff in, made no sense to me. And I later realized that it also doesn't make sense from a constructive perspective, because you cannot construct a continuum, what you have is too many parts to count. So geometry is the set of operators that my brain can compute efficiently in the limit. In sometimes cases, when you look at too many parts to count, you can find operators that converge. But basically, the outcome of your computation is very similar when you use a few trillion or a few billion elements. And so it makes sense circles form and the limit pi forms in the limit, but nothing in the universe contains pi nothing and universe relies on having known the last digit of pi, this is just something that it would be tight if it was contained, as Richard does not.

Unknown 23:37
Well. Okay. So there's one slightly confusing thing, which I've actually recently kind of, sort of thought about a bit, which is the fact that we believe that we are persistent in time implies a certain continuum. Because if if you believe that you have a consistent existence at the next moment in time, between every two moments in time, you are still there. And so in a sense, this belief of persistence and time, is I think, what drives our perception of the continuum. That is

Joscha Bach 24:13
universal is not learnable if there is no information presentation, so if information is not carried forward between different states between different observations, and not able to generalize over observations and form any kind of model. And the same thing, if there is no functional continuity between my mental states, I will not be able to be an observer. But I do notice that my own status as an observer is only an approximate thing, I noticed that I'm not always present, I noticed that there are gaps in my memory. And notice that there are things in my own thinking that I cannot perfectly reconstruct. And that might be due to my inability to record things. It might also be because these things are actually missing, they never existed in the first place. So my own models of me as an observer, very approximate thing and when you say observer, that of course many notions of observer infinity acts that are very different things. And when you say observer, what qualifies as an observer? What is the boundary between you and the universe? And to which degree? Are you actually existing or only approximate?

Unknown 25:12
Well, so I think the thing, and this is something that we are just trying to study is to sort of make a kind of a foundational theory of observers. That is like the foundational theory of computation. We haven't done that yet. So the question is, when you look at all these different measuring devices, and so on, literally, I was just before this, looking at some measuring devices related to chemistry, and looking at individual molecules. And there's a lovely automated chemistry lab that's based on Wolfram language technology, which means that I can do I can be a chemist just writing Wolfram language code, and physical experiments get done. But, you know, so that's a, the question is, just like, we have, for example, Turing machines, as a convenient idealized model for the computational process. What's the right idealized computational model for the observing process. And, you know, at a qualitative level, what is observation observation is, you take all those details of the world, and you somehow, sort of, sort of contract them to be the things that we experience, to be experiences that we can describe as experiences, for example. And so you know, some part of that goes through our human senses, we can see things we can hear things, and so on. As we build instruments, you know, all sorts of chemical, analytical chemistry instruments, we are in effect, those are transducers that go from some feature of the physical world, to things that we can see here, whatever else. And so, for me, kind of the the observer is ultimately the kinds of things that register in our brains, which is certainly a slightly vague thing to say. But that's, you know, that's ultimately what an observer operationally is. And as we build out science, we are essentially constructing technology, we are essentially extending the transduction from the real world, to what we perceive in our brains. But we can start off by asking the question, if we are interested in the things that we can, more or less directly proceed in our brains about physics? How will that work? What kinds of things you know, for example, talking about the individual molecules on a gas, we don't get to perceive those things with our actual bounded computational power, etc, etc, etc. So, therefore, our description of the gas is, according to laws that work for us as observers, we could imagine some alien somewhere, you know, in a very different, whether it's, there's some alien intelligence somewhere that could perceive completely different things about a gas, they could say, you guys talk about pressure and temperature, that's completely stupid. You know, what we've always talked about is, you know, causal graphs of correlations between this and that, and the other. That's what really matters. You know, what you guys have identified is, is stuff while you care about it, but we don't care about it, we built our technology stack on something utterly different. And it's, and that's a, I think that our view of the universe is the view that we have of the universe, certain aspects of that view, depend only on very cautious properties of us as observers, in particular, that we are computationally bounded. And that we believe that we are persistent in time, there's a there's an additional thing, which I think is slightly independent, which is we believe we have that pure motion as possible. That is, it could be the case that you take an object, and you know, you move it around, and it's no longer the same thing. It's because it is made from different atoms of space, and it could just be different. And even in traditional general relativity, if you move an object around, and you are very close to a spacetime singularity, that object will be shredded. And that object will not be the same object in any reasonable sense of sameness, as you move it very close to a spacetime singularity. But the fact that it is possible to have things that are persistent that we perceive as persistent in time, now when we move an object around, it is made of different atoms of space. So we could say, oh, it's a different object, but we don't. For us, at the level of observers that we are, we just say, Oh, that was the same iPhone that just got moved to that different place. But

Joscha Bach 29:42
this is how we define objects. This is great an object is that thing that remains constant when the perspective changes. It's a certain bit of coarse graining, the universe. We do know that objects and the way in which we perceive them are constructs they are somewhat not arbitrary divisions that we impose on The state vector of the universe to interpret our observations be, it's not arbitrary, because it's based on weather, it gives us a useful description, this decomposition, but we know that for instance, if you take, say, a vortex of cigarette smoke, that you've asked for the air, that this is at the boundary of whether it's an object or not, right, at some point, the treating this as an object is no longer meaningful. And there are other objects, which are more solid, which are more persistent. And so it's more natural to treat them as objects. Let's go back for a moment to this notion of the observer. When

Unknown 30:35
you say something, that object, okay, that's a good, that's a good mean, you know, when we think about what is an electron, okay? In our model of the world, there's nothing in the world except space. It's just this big network of atoms of space. So what is an electron? electron is some persistent thing in that network of atoms of space. So just

Joscha Bach 30:57
executing? If, if space is the substrate, your graph? What are the semantics of the links in the graph? They do? What holds the state? is the set of atoms constant? Or is does it change? No, no, it's operating. Okay, and what is operating on it?

Unknown 31:14
It's, it's a rule that, that simply says, if you've got a cluster of things that looks like this, turn it into one that looks like this. It's that it's that rule. So the first way of thinking about this, you just say, pick a rule. It's a particular rule. Okay, we can go to another level, where we're talking about Juilliard, which is a different level above that, and a little bit harder to understand. But the first level is, there is a definite rule. And you're applying that rule everywhere. You could apply it.

Joscha Bach 31:43
Yes. Where does the rule come from? What specifies that it's this rule and not another one?

Unknown 31:49
Well, yes, then then you're going to execute in a descending into the rabbit if you

Joscha Bach 31:53
have to. Please go.

Unknown 31:55
That's, that's interesting. Right. Right. Right now, I think it's very interesting. But it's just, it's, it's worth, let's just, let's just hold for one moment on what electrons are, before we before we descend into the rabbit hole, because this rabbit hole gets pretty deep

Joscha Bach 32:13
in the way just know what I asked Delhi to render what the inner structure of an electron looks like. And it came up with something that looks like out of Gundry movie.

Unknown 32:23
Okay, okay. Let's see, the very beautiful, what, what, what text, it's, you know, you know, what tagged images of the, you know, in current physics, if you say what's inside an electron, people would say, in previous physics, I should say, you know, people call modern physics, the physics that was invented 100 years ago. So there's, I don't know what we should call our physics, but it's the it's the physics beyond modern physics is the physics a century beyond modern physics? So in any case, in in our, sort of, in our previous physics, you say, how big isn't electron people will say it's a geometric point, it has no size. There's, it's some. And so to say, what's inside an electron, there, there won't have been a way to say that. I mean, in quantum field theory, it's more slightly more complicated because those fluctuations that cause there to be virtual photons around an electron, blah, blah, blah, but basically, an electron and it's in the intrinsic theory is like a zero size, geometric point. Okay, so in our model, an electron is something more like a vortex and a fluid. That is there are underlying molecules in the fluid. But there is a collective motion of those molecules that corresponds to a vortex. And that collective motion is persistent, at least for some period of time. So the vortex behaves like an object as you were describing it, and can have an identity that moves around. Now, the molecules that make up the vortex are continually changing. And when you say, Oh, tell me exactly where's the boundary of that vortex? It might be hard to say that. But what we can say is, as a practical matter of as a practical matter if we want to describe you know, that aeroplane has wingtip vortices or something, it's there's a definite notion of a vortex there and there's a definite object that will you know, fall through the air when it when it peels off the, the wingtip of the airplane, or whatever. So we can describe it as an object. So when we talk about electrons, our our belief is that what's happening is that electrons are kind of like vortices, not, not specifically, they have some topological features that maybe like that, but not not in terms of visual appearance or anything like that. But they are conceptually like vortices, in the sense that they are persistent kinds of structures in this hypergraph that represents space. There are structures that survive for a certain for a certain time. Now, one thing about electrons is it seems like every electron is the same Whether that's really true, is not clear. For example, black holes, there are things we know from general relativity, about sort of the fact that black holes, it only matters what the mass and spin of a black hole is more or less. But inside, there can be a, you know, a great civilization that was in some solar system around a star and the whole thing collapsed. And that's all been crushed into the black hole, there can be lots of different things inside black holes, but to the outside, they always look to only, they only expose certain things, and it could be very much the same electrons. But there could be a very close analogy between black holes, which are structures in space time. And electrons, which we also think of structures in space time, both sort of made of space. And it's a little disappointing when we, when we think the following thing that the vast majority of activity in the universe is concerned with the knitting together with the structure of space, and all the electrons and things we care about, and so on, there's some tiny little piece of froth on top of the main activity in the universe, which is kind of knitting together the structure of space. That is it just like in a fluid, the vast majority of the activity is collisions between molecules that maintain the idea of you know, gas with pressure, or liquid or whatever else, rather than the things, the little tiny effects that make collective motions like vortices, and so on. And so it is we think that the universe, but

Joscha Bach 36:24
the pattern in the graph, and this pattern is the property that it's dynamic. And that's the electron is a pattern in the structure of the graph, a characteristic pattern. Yes, characteristic predicate pattern has the property that it is unless it collides with another pattern that dissolves it. It is persistent, and it's dynamic. And it is progressing through this graphical structure of space. And it is occupying a certain region in a particular way. And when it dissolves, it gives rise to different patterns. Yeah, right. This is the way to look at it. And I think that makes total sense. If you go back a step back to the observer, I'm not sure if an observer is the pattern in the sense it's it is a certain pattern, but it has certain functional properties that can be made out of multiple materials. Because it's a computational abstraction. It's a it's slightly more abstract than the electronics. That's

Unknown 37:24
correct. The observer is an abstraction of this. And I don't think I fully understand yet. How to think about that,

Joscha Bach 37:30
I think exactly. So at some point of the observer, that we would need to ask is, where does it end? What is not the observer. And so for instance, when I conceptualize myself as an observer, there are several layers, for instance, there is consciousness and consciousness is not the observer consciousness in this interesting physical sense. And think that consciousness is part of a fiction that my mind creates to make sense of itself. So I'm a virtual character in a virtual world that is generated by my brain to explain the sensory data. But something in the functionality that my brain is part of implements an observer, that is a thing that is able to observe patterns, and memorize them and abstract functions over them to make them explainable. And what I noticed is that when I observe quantum mechanical phenomena, when I measure the spin of a particle, I can never observe a superposition state. The superposition state is something that I do not directly observe. It's something that I construct. In my mind, of course, the electron is also something that I don't directly observe, it's something they construct, in my mind, to make sense of these patterns to classify them. But the collapse of the wavefunction is special. Because when I make an observation, it is a classical observation. It's one where the universe is in a particular way. And when I look, it's always in a particular way. And the fascinating thing about this collapse of the wavefunction is a point in my past, between beyond which I cannot pretend that the universe is testable, because I cannot reconstruct a classical description of the universe is the boundary of me, my skin, is it my nervous system? Or is it this measurement? Right? Is it this instrument by which we measure the universe?

Unknown 39:14
Right? I think that this has been very confused by the traditional formalism of quantum mechanics. Because then the traditional formalism of quantum mechanics, one has this idea of sort of, there are, in a sense, a superposition of possible states in our description. It's a multi way graph. And then that's all fine. We've got good mathematical formalism to describe that it's existed for 100 years. But then there's this kind of mysterious thing that says, well, actually, we have to go from all those threads of history, we have to say, but we experienced just a particular thread of history. So something has to come in and collapse all those threads of history and take us down to just this one classical thread. And in the traditional formalism of quantum mechanics, it's just, you know, and then the hammer comes down, and you've gone from all these threads to one thread, okay? And the description of that hammer is not present, that is not part of the theory, it is just there is a hammer, and it has certain characteristics, and what we need to do to understand what's going on and to understand, for example, things like whether we can really expect to get sort of a quantum advantage in a quantum computer, those kinds of things, is to understand more about that hammer to take the hammer apart. And for that, the feature of the, you know, to the universe, in a sense, from the sort of God's eye view of the universe from outside, so to speak, what you would see is all these threads of history, you wouldn't see a single thread of history, you would see all these threads of history, but we see a single thread of history. Now that's analogous to the fact that we see there's all these gas molecules bouncing around, but all we see is the pressure of the gas. So what's happening I think, is we are coarse graining, not in physical space. But in this what we call bronchial space, the space of quantum branches. We are we exist, our minds exist as branching things in this universe in this multi way universe. And we are we have an extent and bronchial space, just like we have an extended physical space. So just like with coarse graining, we're not looking at every single atom of space, every single molecule on a gas, we're just aggregating a bunch of these together. And that's our experience of the world. So similarly, when it comes to quantum mechanics, we are aggregating clumps of pods in bronchial space. So we have an extent and Branchville space,

Joscha Bach 41:40
what does that extend? So it says it know, what is what belongs to it? What is part of it was not part of it? Is it a sequence of classical memories. So it's something where we basically select in our own minds I a part of the grandchild space, the one that we can reconstruct, and construct ourselves from it is our own model of what we are as the observer, or as the observer. Anything beyond that.

Unknown 42:05
Now, I think it's more or less that we're constructing something from it. So that the big question, the big physics question is this, let's say we have all these threads of history. And we simply say, by fiat, we are going to consider the threads of history to be the same, we're going to say, they're really all the same, they really all did the same thing. We're, you know, you can think about this in terms of theorem proving we can have completion, you know, we can have critical power lemmas. And things, you know, the variety of ways to think about it. But basically, what we're doing is we're conflating different parts of history, we're saying, for our purposes, we're just going to consider them the same. Just like in the case of molecules and a gas, we can say, there's some detailed motion of molecules, but we don't care about the detail of motion, we only care about the overall pressure of the gas. So suddenly, we are conflating together many detailed parts of history. Okay, so the big question is, is it consistent to do that? So what what what would it mean, if it wasn't wasn't consistent, let's look at in the case of the gas, what it means to say, it's, it's good enough to just say there's a lump of liquid here, for example, we that the reason that that's good enough is because when we look at the time evolution of that system, it's still just a lump of liquid, it could be the case that that lump of liquid doesn't when when it time evolves, the position of every single molecule and lump of liquid matters, and how it time evolves. It, you know, it's sufficient to just say, there's liquid, and it's then you know, it has some overall form. We know the overall structure, we can predict the overall structure in the future. But it might be that we need to know that the different configurations of molecules in that liquid would determine its future would determine the overall aspects of its future. That is that it would be in a sense, the way we describe this as the process of shredding, that, is that the that you think you've just got a description. Okay. I'll give you an example that we've looked at recently and meta mathematics, you think you've got the Pythagoras theorem, okay? But you now say, if you try and base that on deep axiomatic structures, there are many different ways to formulate the Pythagoras theorem, many different definitions of the real numbers, many different kinds of detailed axiom systems and so on. But each one of those, we just bring those together and say, it's just the Pythagoras theorem. So what what allows us to do higher mathematics is that we can say we've got the Pythagoras theorem, now we can deduce something else, just from the Pythagoras theorem, but it couldn't matter. That deduction could be affected by which model of the real numbers we used in formulation, the Pythagoras theorem. If that was the case, we would no longer have this kind of, you know, aggregate thing that we can think about, we'd be shredded down to the level of the very detailed, sort of, well, atoms of of existence, so to speak, that make up the old and that sort of meta mathematic structure. So it's the same thing. In in. In all these cases, there's the question of, can we maintain the fiction that we can coarse grain things otherwise? Or does the coarse graining fall apart because of the actual time evolution of the system. So it could be the case that, that instead of those molecules in the gas, staying more or less, the ones that were together before that make a certain density of gas staying together, and a second later, also making a certain density of gas, it could be that, oh, if the molecules were dancing around in this way or that way, then at the next moment, they will have something which you know, where the gas is separated into two pieces, or something where even at an aggregate level, we can no longer this week, we can't describe it, you know, with it, there's no simple description of it. So the fact that the simple description that we make, that we as abstraction observers make of the system, the fact that that can be transported forward in time, that's a fact about physics. And that might not be true. I mean, for example, it could be the case that the thing the the thing we make up, you know, has gravitational collapse leads to a mathematical inconsistency. If we're doing in a matter, mathematics, lots of pathological things could happen, that would prevent us from being able to kind of take our aggregated description and move it forward in time. But I think that the notion of the observer is, it is essentially the fiction that there is an aggregated description of things, the observer, the operational thing the observer is doing is choosing to make an aggregated description. And there is an underlying thing viewed from the outside, so to speak. And there are an infinite number of possible aggregator descriptions you can make. The thing that is non trivial. And the place where the science really, really bites is that if you make certain assumptions about the observer, very cost assumptions, you can immediately deduce things about how, what the observer can observe. So for example, if you say the observer is computationally bounded, believes that persistent in time, it then follows that space time must follow Einstein's equations for general relativity. It also follows we think that the multi-way graph for the universe must follow the Fineman path integral rules for quantum mechanics.

Joscha Bach 47:31
That's a very interesting thing, because quantum mechanics and the non deterministic Turing machine are traditionally not defined in the same way. The model based systems that you describe, and not exactly the same formulas, and it seems to me as physics uses for quantum mechanics and quantum computers are not the same thing as non deterministic Turing machines. How do you define it? Do you say? It's literally the multiverse space?

Unknown 47:57
Yeah, yeah. And I mean, you know, we can, okay, so it's a little there's, there's more technical detail here. So the one feature of quantum mechanics is we have this notion of quantum states and amplitudes for quantum states. So the one sort of confusion of quantum mechanics is people say, oh, there's a certain amplitude, and that amplitude is a complex number. Okay? I think the bundling of the magnitude and phase of those numbers together as a single complex number is very confusing. And I didn't realize this until a couple years ago. But I always believe that I mean, you know, I learned quantum mechanics when I was a kid. And I sort of always just assumed that's the way things work. And so here's, here's the description roughly. So we think about this multi way graph that has all these different all these different threads. And each thread corresponds to a quantum well, essentially a quantum that a full quantum state is a slice across this multi way graph. And so a superposition is just saying we're going to consider together two threads in this multi way graph. And and then the question is, one question is when we when we take this multi way graph, and we make a slice across it, what, how do we lay out the threads in that slice? So all we've got is just this graph, and it's got threads coming out of it. But can we lay those out in some kind of space. And we talk about this notion of bronchial space. And the idea is a simple way to construct that is just to imagine that every, every pair of ends that have a common ancestor, every pair of states that have a common ancestor are connected. So you make a graph of just that common ancestry. We call that the branch shield graph. The limit of the branch or graph is what we call bronchial space. Just like in physics cool space, the limit of our hyper graph of relations between atoms of space we think of as a map of physical space. So okay, so we have this bronchial space, it's a different kind of fit space and physical space. And it is defined by these entanglements by these common ancestries of different states. So what we believe is that essentially positioning bronchial space is quantum phase. So as you move around and bronchial space, you are effectively changing the phase of a quantum amplitude. And we think that the magnitude of the quantum amplitude is just the path counting of how many different ways are there to reach a particular place in bronchial space. So for example, destructive interference where you have, you know, photons can go through two slits, the what's happening that we think is that those two photons are those two waves of them going through one slit the other slit, those two possibilities, and up at opposite ends of bronchial space. Now, why does that mean as destructive interference, the reason is that no observer will knit together, those two completely separated pieces of bronchial space, the observer is a bounded extension, bronchial space. So to the observer, the photon just disappeared. It didn't, there wasn't because the observer can't, doesn't, you know, the observer will not, will not sort of conflict together these things that ended at opposite ends that ended up at opposite ends of bronchial space. So this picture of multi-way graphs, and bronchial space and so on. So one thing to say is that we can compile like quantum circuits, that people using, you know, quantum information theory and so on, you can compile those to multi way graphs, we have a nice way of doing that. And you can even do nice quantum circuit optimization, using essentially theorem proving methods on multi-way graphs. So it's kind of a proof by compilation, that it really is the same as traditional quantum mechanics.

Joscha Bach 51:59
So what that also work on phonons. For for now, is the quasi particles that we can use to describe the movement of sound to solid objects, for instance,

Unknown 52:12
well, which aspect of the so so the in I mean, insofar as one has a mean, okay, so the in quantum information theory, people usually talk about gates, gates are not Hamiltonians. I mean, you you make a gate, it's kind of a complicated limit, from taking the step by step and time Hamiltonian of evolution for a quantum system and turning that into a gate. So I don't know, in the case of photons, the the traditional methods for making you know, what people call quantum computers, I don't remember one of those being related to photons, although, as I think about it, I don't see why you couldn't do that. I mean, I think that the main issue with phones is that that, you know, the thing that is cell phone ons, you know, normally, they're just going through a solid, but then there's this thing, the clap process, which is this nonlinear scattering process that leads to interaction between finance. And that's what you'd have to use to get, I mean, it's no good to just have a bunch of independent bits. That's not what you need. But in order to make something which actually does a computation, you need to have interaction between those things. And I don't see why one shouldn't be able to, I mean, one of the things that has come out of my earliest science is you can make computation out of almost anything. And this is undoubtedly you can make a universal computer out of photons. Now, the

Joscha Bach 53:48
phonons, for instance, be better described using multiverse systems.

Unknown 53:53
Well, look any I'm thinking about that. And I, you know, the thing that is a little bit, we're not quite there yet, is quantum field theory for multi way systems. So let me let me explain. So then, you know, what I was describing before, is, is multiverse systems in which every node in the multiverse system is a complete state of the universe? Okay, that's essentially a story of quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics has a limited number of where you're talking about a complete state of the universe. And quantum field theory. You're also talking about, you're talking about space, as well as this, you're talking about things laid out in space. So for example, Fineman diagrams from my former friend, Dick Feynman, where we're, you know, a space time diagrams representing kind of the not just there is an electron but there's an electron moving through space and time. And so that the the formulation of so a quantum field When, in quantum mechanics, you're rolling things up into a single state of the world, the state of the world. And in quantum field, you're saying, there's actually lots of degrees of freedom in that quantum field, that are sort of should be separately considered to be at different places in space, and so on, you're not packaging it all up and just saying, there's just no two possible states of the world. So it's a so what happens in in our Multiverse systems, the thing that I described, where you're just packaging the universe into each node of the multiverse system, that's like quantum mechanics, it's a deeply wasteful way to think about things. Because those two different nodes in the multiverse system, they only differ by a few bits, they're in the corner of the universe, right? Now, in order to not have that happen, in order to be able to bring those together, you have to be doing quantum field theory. And that's sort of a collection of different formulations of multi way systems. We have things called local multi-way systems and Glocal multibyte systems. And it's, it's something which is I mean, just to explain, you know, why are we not going fast? I think we've gone pretty fast, actually. But why are we not going even faster? The fundamental problem is the mathematics that we need to use to describe these things, is in the natural course of the development of mathematics hundreds of years in the future. So it's the, you know, the kind of thing for example, a very typical issue that we have is these, these hypergraphs, they are not, the limiting structure does not necessarily correspond to integer dimensional space. But calculus is built only for integer dimensional space. When you learn multivariate calculus, you might learn, you know, calculus of 123 variables, you do not learn calculus of 2.6 variables. And there isn't a formulation of that there's we're trying to build one based on our models, but you need that sort of a thing that could have been built. Well, it probably couldn't have been built, actually, when calculus was invented 300 years ago, but we kind of have to build a structure like that, to be able to describe our models in a way that you can sort of an interesting thing, because we're trying to bridge the underlying computational model with the thing that we can understand with our brains. Because this is a you know, this is in a sense story of my life is kind of you have the raw underlying computation, that's very powerful. And then you have what we with our brains can understand. And, you know, my main life activity is building what's now Wolfram language, which is, you know, a computational language that is a bridge between what we think about with our brains, and what is possible to do computationally. And so people have

Joscha Bach 57:41
this task over to the machines are bent with hand over this task to the machines of constructing these mathematics. When you say that the PCB scratching the surface of mathematics was the formulas instead, we discover mathematics is the space of all possible simple games, right. And in a sense, human mathematics is the set of simple games that you can just come up with something like a 12 layer network, that runs algorithms that are more complicated and cleverer than the ones that we've came up with so far in AI. But ultimately, it's quite limited. And I suspect that future AIS will have to get drunk. So they are only coherent over 12 layers and look at the universe, it looks to them like it looks to human physicists, they find this very amusing. It I think that we are at the threshold of building systems where we humans don't NEED TO TINKER anymore, is discovering the consequences of building certain symbol systems. But we can automate this exploration beyond what Mathematica is doing. The question

Unknown 58:37
is, what's the point though? Because the fact is, you know, I can run, you know, my favorite cellular automaton. It's full of interesting computation. Most of it is not something that right now in history I care about. Now, it could be, you know, when I first started thinking about computational irreducibility, in the early 1980s, I thought of it as you know, a limitation for what you could study scientifically, and so on, then somebody figured out, you could use it for proof of work for blockchains not a thing that I'd ever had ever occurred to me, right. So in other words, we're taking this thing plucked out of the computational universe, in that case, a very poor phenomenon in the computational universe of computational irreducibility. And we're saying now we've got a use for it, that we humans care about. So I think the point is that, you know, yes, at some fundamental level of computation, the AIS can do, you know, can do cellular automaton could do wonderful computation. Even in matter mathematics, we just made this bid study of matter, mathematics and sort of the space of all possible mathematics is and so on. There's amazing richness there. Okay, what we can actually plot we've actually got pictures of this as you look at the space of all possible mathematical theorems of a certain type. And you say, which are the ones that we humans have given names to little dots? Hearing they're in this giant space. And so the question is, the whole thing is computationally there, the whole thing is absolutely accessible to a computational AI so to speak. The issue is, it's like observing in quantum mechanics, the issue is, there's lots of stuff going on underneath. But for us to connect it to what our brains deal with, is a thin wire, so to speak. So in other words, we can say, you could say the ultimate future of science is you're just computing all these things. But that ultimate future of science is already happening. It's been happening in nature forever, so to speak. But the problem is, the connection of that to us as humans, is the thing that we care about. Now, if you say, well, well, you know, nature is doing what nature does, you know, the weather has a mind of its own, it's doing all the all the amazing things it does. And but the part of it, that is irrelevant to us, is the part that we can describe, we can experience etc. So I think it's, it's some, you know, it's sort of a fallacy to think, you know, when we make the AI is powerful enough, they'll just go off on their own and discover all of science, that that's, that's almost a triviality. The SU is to make a bridge between what we care about. And, you know, one of the things I think is interesting about the course of history is that as we, we didn't yet talk about this notion of real space, but the notion of sort of the space of all possible worlds, but as we, as we kind of, as we progress, as we understand more concepts, as we build more measuring devices, this, the set of things out there in the world, that we care about gradually expands. So you know, there was a time when we didn't notice the microscopic world at all. Then microscopes were discovered, invented, there was a time I think the key thing of quantum mechanics is when electronic amplifiers were invented, we could take a small signal, amplify it. And I think that was what I haven't completely tested this history, but I'm pretty sure that was what led to the invention to the discovery of quantum mechanics is that that so in other words, there are features of the world that we were currently unaware of. So So for example, the big feature of our world right now, you know, talking about the gas molecules, again, people may say, in the future, gosh, I cannot believe that all those guys noticed about a gas was its pressure and temperature, that was really dumb, they should have noticed all these other things, which are of computational importance. So now in trained in technology, and so on, I mean, it's been the same, you know, the sort of the noticing of physical effects that we then and train in technology, and I ended up carrying about, that's, in a sense, the story of the progress of sort of the paradigms of science and technology. And so I think, I think it's, it's the idea, that term, so you know, one of the questions would be, is there a way to take sort of the world as it is, and find those words for describing the world that we should have noticed, but didn't like, I'd say protein folding, you know, we know proteins make alpha helixes beta sheets, okay, maybe there are five other motifs that we should have had names for, but we don't. And that's why we found protein folding hard, is because we didn't notice those other motifs that maybe aren't visually very obvious in the way that we usually look at pictures of proteins and so on, but which are perfectly recognizable, if we sort of select them in the right way. And once we can describe, you know, that protein has a fabulous, you know, leaf or something, then we can immediately say, oh, it's going to fold this way, or whatever else. And that it's kind of a, a, that there are certain key description of the world. I mean, you know, you take your average image identification network, for example. And you look in the middle of it, and it's made all kinds of distinctions that we don't currently have words for, and which, you know, there may be some things which are, which we can identify in the world. So one of the points is that, that there's sort of a question of what things are useful to identify in the world? And where can we build sort of technology stacks? On top of those things that we identify in the world?

Joscha Bach 1:04:21
Yeah, this is the point. I think that it's about agency. This V is a very problematic notion. There's already a similar phenomenon going on, as you're saying, Why should I care about what the AI is thinking? If I don't understand what the AI is doing anymore? I cannot connect it to anything what I'm doing. I've heard physicists say the same thing about you, right? It's mathematics might be right, but why should they care? Because I cannot connect it to anything that me or my community are doing. And so in some sense, you're already occupying a stratum between human physicists and superhuman minds. Yeah. So your V is a very special one. It's a very particular polarized by a status that you're using when you describe a The perspective of us on the universe and what we are working on. It's not the community of physicists are working on, it's not what humanity at large is working on, there is a certain projection that you are making when you say we, and I agree with this v i, because I enjoy your perspective. And I think that it is part of a larger perspective. It's one that is very motivated. And where there's a branch, you'll space of ideas, and many of these ideas work in a superposition of space, but they don't touch each other until the branches merge eventually, again, and I suspect that the similar thing is going to happen because artificial minds that there will be at intermediate steps that we don't get, until we bend the branch back and ask the AI to explain to us what the AI is discovered. And AI is going to bottle our mind and explain to a child, that it understands how it operates or understands the mental state of the child was able to out model us and to translate this into a language that they understand to the degree that they understand it. And I suspect the universe is mostly intelligible. It just you have done some time have difficulty to make these ends meet. But ultimately, what matters is what can you do with it? What changes can you produce in the universe, an agent is a system that controls the future, right, and the available systems that can control the future by themselves. They're part of us, and you're part of them in a way.

Unknown 1:06:17
But you know, one statement you made that the universe is intelligible. I think that the intrinsic, you know, we didn't let let's talk for a second about this really odd concept, just so we make sure we, we touch that, because people I think will enjoy that the but you know, this idea that the universe is intelligible the universe as we observe it.

Unknown 1:06:39
You know, it is a non trivial fact that the universe as we observe, it can be intelligible to us as observers, it might not be true, it might be the case that with our methods of observation, things will always get shredded. But it seems to be the case that with the level of description that we want to give to the universe, that we can be successful at describing the universe consistently at that level of description. But it isn't the case that the whole universe is, you know, given any kind of observer, humans, aliens, AIS, whatever, given any kind of observer, there is going to be a type of description that that observer can give. And it is not self evident, that that will be a consistent type of description of the universe, that's essentially a big result of physics, that there is a big result of what we've been trying to do is that there is consistency in that. But let's, let's go to this really odd thing. And then I like your analogy of, you know, I'm I consider that we are, you know, we're going off on a really old spacecraft. So we can explain that that's our, that's our activity, as we as we move, as we try and expand the domain of knowledge, we can think about ourselves, you know, as we go and explore physical space, we're moving in, in, you know, we're expanding our domain, you know, a few astronomical units away from where we are in physical space. Let's talk about this really odd thing, and then we could talk about expanding in real space. And I really want to come back to the, the minds and AIS and, and bronchial space, because I think we can have an interesting chat about that. The but real space. So the, you know, you had asked before, why this rule for the universe and not another effectively justify, you know, why is it that rule and not another? I have to say I was very confused about this for a long time. But what I then realized was just like we say, there's a particular rule, and you apply it everywhere, where you can, why don't you just imagine that you apply all possible rules everywhere you can. And so you might have thought that's just gonna be a complete mess, there's gonna be no structure, you know, you apply all possible rules everywhere. For an infinite time, what are you going to get? Well, in fact, that thing that you might think was completely structureless is full of structure. And the real reason for that structure is that two rules that are different will branch out. But then those two rules might lead to something which is identical. So you ended up with getting because of this notion of equivalence, which ultimately ends up being an observer related notion. But the fact that you conflate things, you could just say, let's let everything that is even nominally different, even two graphs that are laid out differently, even though they're isomorphic graphs, even that, but just because they're laid out differently, let's consider them to be different. But instead, what we're saying is that, you know, equivalent things are equivalence equivalent things are considered the same. And so that object that we have, which is essentially the object that you get by looking at all possible computations, let's say all possible Turing Machine rules, run from all possible initial conditions for an infinite time. That object is the entangled limit of all possible computations. And it has a, you can slice it in many different ways. So for example, one slicing involves looking at it progressing through time. That's the typical slice that a physical observer takes. As you say, we are localized with respect to what rules we assume are being used. And we are slicing it, we're looking at successive slices through time. And again, another thing that's confusing, is we are not fully localized. And we don't, we don't know, with any finite number of experiments, we cannot determine which particular rule the universe is using. There's a limit, there's sort of an uncertainty lead, it lead as a result of the fact that the finiteness of scientific induction, within a finite number of experiments, there will always be a cluster, a cloud of possible rules for the universe. But the next fact is that, that there are many things that we can say, which don't depend on exactly where we are, and Boolean space, and how big that cloud is, there are things that we can say, that are, that are general facts about multi computation. And those general facts turn out to be very have very specific statements about the way physics works. But essentially, the way we can think about it is we experienced the universe with the particular sensory systems, we have the particular ideas we have for describing the world, we are experiencing this really odd in a particular place in the Juilliard. Just like we exist in a particular place in physical space, we exist in a particular place in rural space. And, you know, our friendly extraterrestrial aliens, so to speak, in addition to being you know, living on a, you know, in a different solar system, can also live in a different place in real space. And so what would that look like? Well, that looks like their description of the universe is utterly incoherent with hours. So what we consider to be important feature of the universe, or you've got a planet there, they say, We don't care about the planet, what we care about is some detail of the correlation between the, you know, the, the electromagnetic field in this corner of this, even if they describe it as an electromagnetic field. So it's

Joscha Bach 1:12:15
also a mechanism that, that we use to describe the brain, this particular kind of control hierarchy that we discover in universe where atoms control elementary particles are other result of control of elementary particles, and cells are the result of the control of molecules and organisms are the result of the controlled interactions between sets, and so on. And minds are the result of the models that organisms make to this would be different from them. And they would discover something that is entirely orthogonal to this. And that is because they inhabit the different parts of the Boolean space. Yes,

Unknown 1:12:51
I think so. The question of what the question of what those other parts of real space are like, is a very, you know, I have a hard time thinking about that, because what that's asking for you no one talks about paradigm shifts in human science, every one of those paradigm shifts is a little tiny move in a little space, little distance away, and a little change in the way we describe the world. If you say, let's jump all the way to the aliens, so to speak, that may be a very long way, that's like the equivalent of 100,000 human paradigm shifts, let's say, and people have a hard enough time, we all have a hard enough time with one or two in our lifetime, so to speak, to make the jump, you know, 100,000 paradigm shifts away. That's that is a, it's a very difficult thing to conceptualize what you'll end up with.

Joscha Bach 1:13:44
And I seem to be constraints in our world that depend on how we operate. For instance, if I imagined you were made out of knots, and somebody would put you in a four dimensional space, you would then revel, if you would end up in a two dimensional space that couldn't be any knots in the first place. Or more relevant to our existence, there could be no planetary surfaces in 4d, because there can be no stable orbits in the way gravity works, right. So that we discover the beings that live on planetary surfaces is contingent on living in a subset of the Juliet space that can be described as, quote a 3d universe. Right. So, there are other areas in this space probably, but the question is, could they have observers and they can, of course, be many solutions that are different from ours, but observers in ways that could not be translated, that was the same mathematics ultimately that cannot be very you do not find any shared language?

Unknown 1:14:43
Okay. So that's the question. It's like motion. Okay, so, so motion, you can take an object and just move it around incrementally in space. That's pure motion. We're all happy with that. Okay. Another possibility is, if you want to get from here to there, the only choice is to use like a Star Trek transport. Water, so to speak, where you go from your initial form, you are completely deconstructed into some, you know, elementary things and then your reconstruction at the other end, the fact that when you're describing, you know, how do you get from one place in real space to another, the question of whether there is pure motion, there is a non trivial question. I mean, that that's a, that's something where now to say, make one comment about this. So with certain assumptions about us as observers, we're computationally bounded, we believe we're persistent in time. The good news about that is that those constraints already give us some pretty big pieces of physics, we only need those constraints, you know, qualitatively to understand why something like that might be true. If you think about the gas analogy, again, we have all these molecules bouncing around we have, they could be air molecules, they could be water molecules, and molecules and water molecules are very different characteristics. Yet, the equations of fluid dynamics are the same for air molecules and for water molecules. And it's kind of the same thing with the equations, general relativity, and quantum mechanics, that even with different underlying stuff, at the level of the, at the collective level, that an observer like us can observe them, they, they have certain characteristics. Now, I think, what you're, I mean, you know, one of the things you're perhaps getting at is how, you know, one question would be, let's say, we have a, a an automated, sort of royal transporter, you know, that moves us through real space. And, and that potentially, is a does this thing that you were describing, where you go from a place and royal space, and it is doing the translation back to, oh, let's deal with, you know, interpreting that for those for those humans who have only these kinds of concepts. I think one of the issues there is that, you know, certain things about physics, like gravity, things like that will be translatable. But other things, it's like, well, we just don't have a word for that. In other words, you can you can try to describe it, you know, there is going to be a translation, just because, you know, you know, everything is in the end operating as a universal computer. And you can, in principle, write an interpreter, right, you know, between one universal computer and another. But the question is, is there kind of a pure motion like interpreter where you take big concepts in one thing, and move them into big concepts? And the other thing? Or do you have to grind it down to the level of sort of the machine code, and then build it back up again? And I think the, the really the challenging thing is to see how do you go from? You know, but and perhaps the same thing even applies to AI systems today is to what extent you know, we've got a system and it does what it does. And the question is what you know, and we have a certain way of thinking about things, we have a certain cognitive framework, which is not just induced by the structure of our brains, it's also the history of the development of our science, etc, etc, etc, we have a certain way of describing things, is that way of describing things? What is the way of translating what's going on inside the neural network, to our way of describing things? And it is, I think, not self evident. I mean, it depends what you care about in the neural net, if what you care about is whether it sees cats or dogs? Well, you know, we've got a good description of that, if what you care about is something more kind of more detailed, it's some, you know, that's something where it's not obvious that, that that we'll be able to that we'll be able to get a description language, which is a useful and faithful description, language that also connects to us. But you know, I want to come to this question of, of, of minds and sort of the molecular

Joscha Bach 1:19:02
modeling. That's crucial. I mean, first of all, if you translate ourselves with a space, the question is what is preserved, I don't have an identity attached. When I wake up in a lucid dream. For instance, I'm not remembering usually in which city I live, and often not what my name is, or what my body looks like, there. It's basically a system of meaning constructed from the computational primitives in my brain that is autonomous that is a new one. And when I'm lucky, I can carry some memories over into the other self that forms they are the different configuration in my mind after I wake up, and that can interpret them but I don't know what they actually mean and why they made sense before and which way they make sense. And to the degree that I can construct the continuity because I have a similar configuration. As an self reflecting observer that tells the story in the same terms using similar concepts, similar relational primitives, and so on. I'm able to transport myself between the dreams And the self and the day, also between the selves at different times in my life at different ages in my life and so on, they don't have an identity beyond that it's just a projection. So this identity would also not exist. When I project myself to the rule yet, the only thing that would exist is a translation. And then is the question are the underlying worlds so similar, that we can identify what has been translated? Because we would have to deduce it from first principles? I think?

Unknown 1:20:29
Well, okay, so one question is, when you have your cognitive model of your life, the question is, and you say, you're gonna make a translation from one sort of level of one type of cognitive model to another, the dream model versus the waking model, the, you know, the 30 year old versus the 40, year old, whatever it is, right? The the,

Joscha Bach 1:20:51
it's about the language in which I write the model. Also, basically, the language of thought for which the model is constructed doesn't have to be the same.

Unknown 1:20:59
Well, right. I mean, okay. So, you know, to pull it back to something that, you know, a very practical thing that, you know, is this whole notion of computational language that, you know, we built from Mathematica, Wolfram language, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera. This is the, you know, what are we trying to do that, what is the point, the point is, what we're trying to do is we're trying to have a thing that takes all those infinite, that infinite ocean of computation, and we're trying to identify lumps in that ocean of computation that are relevant to us humans at this time in history. And that's basically, you know, that's in a sense, the activity, it's a, it's like, you know, it's a some kind of autists, like activity, where we're trying to abstract from this ocean, the things that are significant and important to us humans. Now, what, you know, what we're trying to do there is to make a computational language that cuts across a, a decent swath of different use cases of humans, etc, etc, etc. When you get to be more detailed, you can say, Well, really, there's a computational language. For the 30 year old me there's a computational language for the 40 year old me there's a computational language, but this and that, we haven't seen those fine. You know, we haven't built those fine distinctions. Because it's more useful to have something that cuts that allows you to, to kind of merge between those kinds of things. But I think that that's this question of what does it look like when you go from the global computational language down to the the sort of the dialect, so to speak for the 30 year old you versus the 40 year old? You? I think that's an interesting question. I would also like to say that I think in terms of the way that brains work, and so on, and the way that we sort of conceptualize what we're thinking about, and so on, there's, there's a lot of things I don't really understand very well yet. In terms of sort of multi way systems, and multiple parts of, you know, our brains are full of, you know, 100 billion neurons that are all firing and doing all kinds of things. Yet, we have this perception that there is a definite thread of attention, consciousness, whatever we call it, the definite thread of experience that we go through. That's not really what's happening in our brains. It's what

Joscha Bach 1:23:17
we construct, you have to because otherwise, we would not be intelligible, if it has probably a feature of the languages in which the mind describes itself, that it has that nature. But the interesting question is, how is that language implemented? So, for instance, we recently had the room boozer Meyer as a guest, among others. And Jerome had this insight that our mind on our mental states are best described using the formalism of quantum mechanics not because he believes that our brain is literally a quantum computer, but because of the superposition of states and our thoughts of mental representations, but then collapse into definite representations, slightly different perspective that you could take on this is that we don't see the brain as a set of circuits like transistors, that get us in a definite way from state to state, and every of these states corresponds to the execution state in a symbolic language, but rather that the mind is a multiverse system, in which we go through a multitude of potential states and then collapse. And this notion of the collapse is super important and interesting. Is this, just the states where the branches merge in the branch yield space, a state face, or is there something more going on?

Unknown 1:24:27
No, I think that's a, it's an interesting and reasonable view of what's happening in the mind and the sort of the unconscious versus conscious, you know, in the unconscious, so to speak, there's all this stuff bubbling around, all these different parts being followed. And somehow our thread of attention picks out this one path and how that happens. And you know, what mechanisms? In other words, the mind, I think it's probably a reasonable thing to think about it as it is like a measuring device that is going like a quantum measuring device that is somehow taking these different threads and conflating them together. Now, I don't know, I haven't thought this through, you know, what? Look, I think with, you know, we were having a conversation with neuroscience friend of mine a little while ago. It's actually it's a, it's probably a long conversation with Harrison, offski, that somewhere on YouTube, the mentor and I were talking about the intermediate language of neuroscience. That is, there is, you know, the description of individual neurons firing, and there is our computational language trying to describe at a high level, what the overall import of our thoughts is, so to speak. But what's the intermediate language of neuroscience? What does it look like, beyond the level of saying, oh, there are 100 billion neurons firing at a time or a billion firing at a time or whatever it is? versus, you know, what is the intermediate description language? And is it and how, you know, how best is that setup? And I think that's, to me, that's an obvious next frontier of neuroscience that goes beyond, you know, yes, you can record from single cells. And yes, you can do sort of overall experiments about psychophysics, and so on. You know, there's this intermediate language description, and I completely agree that these multi way systems are a very interesting way into that, that question of what, you know, what is the intermediate language and the idea that the intermediate language is, you know, transition from one definite state to another, that's probably not the right picture. I mean, it's probably much more of a multi-way picture. And I think that that, you know, one of the challenges and a lot of lot of fields is that, you know, physics has been a very successful, formalized field, it's ingested lots of fancy mathematics, it's, you know, it makes use of all those things, most of the fields have not done that. And most of the people who work in other fields, really don't know, you know, that there's a big tower to climb. And, you know, instead of the formalism of existing mathematics, you know, I was looking recently at immunology, for example, where there are a whole bunch of things that I think are probably quite accessible, but they require a formalism that really is not the same kind of formalism that you would learn in kind of elementary mathematics and so on. And it's just, you know, it's this, it's this question of the population of real space by humans, so to speak, is, you know, there, there are sort of different parts of it. And sometimes you need to sort of travel from one part to another, you know, I think you were commenting on on the fact that the things that that, you know, we've been doing with our physics project, and their relationship to kind of

Unknown 1:27:43
physics that people have cared about before, one of the things that's been very pleasing, not entirely expected, although in retrospect, it is not so surprising is that there have been a lot of towers of mathematical physics that have been built in the last 50 years, many of those towers have not really known on what foundations they should be constructed. But they've been the towers have been built quite high. And quite well, what has happened is that our physics project seems to provide foundations for many of those towers. And so even though people didn't, you know, might say, people can see the attachment between the tower they built, and the stuff we have, and that makes it meaningful to them, even if they don't necessarily see all the way to the center of the Earth, so to speak. And understand, you know, the full story, I mean, for example, you know, you can use our methods, as I mentioned, to do quantum circuit optimization, you can use our models to make models for for numerical, general relativity, for simulating, you know, black hole mergers and things like that. One can do that, without ever believing in our models, we can do that by just saying, this is a good numerical method for studying black hole mergers, without ever talking about the kind of the full kind of ontology of our models. So it's sort of an interesting dynamic of that, that's the way that you attach sort of things people care about, to, you know, to, as you change the paradigm, so to speak, there's an interface that you can create, and this is an this is a kind of interface that I was not particularly, I wasn't politically expecting that interface that you can take the tower, and you've got a new foundation for the tower, rather than you have to build a new tower. And that's some and so I don't know. Yeah, I mean, I think in the case of, of, of neuroscience and AIS and, and these questions about sort of AI's thinking about themselves and these questions about sort of how one maps the notion of observers on to our experience of consciousness and so on, I'm, I'm rather enthusiastic about what this kind of formalism that we've built, can that one think about okay, one of the one of the The big cheats. And what we're doing is that we get to use physics. That is because our formalism applies to physics, we get to use the giant tower that's been built in the history of physics. And we get to import the intuition from that giant tower to all these other fields.

Joscha Bach 1:30:17
Yeah, but there's a separate towers, right. That's an interesting thing that our towers are not built on a foundation for the most part in our intellectual traditions. And that's in part because the foundations were destroyed in some areas that never existed, but the Christian civilization radically destroyed our ability to construct a rational model of reality. And in some sense, our science started out with fake news. And our also our society's Lukianoff. And HS wrote another book in which they describe that social media in their perspective has permanently destroyed the ability of our societies to make coherent models of reality. And

Unknown 1:30:55
it's an interesting claim

Joscha Bach 1:30:57
that it's something to this on a certain level after the end of modernism and became a post modernists society in a way, philosophy stopped having systemic models, and looking for systemic models. And the scientists stopped having systemic coherent models. So this project of building this joint Tower of Babel in a way, was given up, and instead of just have lots of lots of different towers that are built on Rubble, and they exist in next to each other. And they are often very similar. For instance, there's a lot of overlap between econ and computer science. And many of the interesting algorithms that economic risks have discovered or rediscovered an AI unbeknownst to each of the fields. So theory, reinforcement learning, yeah, and Q learning and things like that. They're basically what AI is doing at the moment, for the most part is to reinvent statistics on a different foundation, and automating it. And there are other fields, which have invented their own tools to deal with statistics, and also physics in a way. But also AI and neuroscience, we have tried to bridge between neuroscience by in sometimes blocking these people into the same buildings, but they're still building separate towers there that are largely incompatible. Right? So how do you think that your ideas could be used as a foundation to towers that even don't talk to each other?

Unknown 1:32:16
Right? Well, I think that's the great thing is that first computation, and now the rule yard, are very radically, kind of, sort of, you know, integrative forces, because, you know, the whole idea of computation, the fact that we're building a computational x for all x for all different fields, that's a very radically integrative move. The same thing happened 400 years ago, like when mathematical notation was invented, when mathematical science started off, there were lots of fields, which I mean, the integration was not nearly as big as it can be with computation. But I think that between, you know, computation, leads to lots of integration, I think, these multi computational ideas lead to another level of integration. The thing that's particularly interesting about multi computation is that whereas, you know, with computation, where you're going from one state to the next to the next, this phenomenon of computational irreducibility, kind of limits certain kinds of things, you can say, the big surprise to me and multi computation was that when you have an observer, observing this multi computational process, you end up being able to have kind of predictive things you can say, which correspond to, which are the transported versions of the core results of physics. But you know, coming back to your, your statements about kind of the long arc of history of science, it is interesting, that a lot of things that we're now looking at, were thought about by theologians and philosophers 500 years ago, 1000 years ago, a couple of 1000 years ago, and you are right, that science basically gave up on on some of these kinds of global statements. I think what happened is that the particulars of mathematical science was so successful, that they kind of whizzed off into, you know, out ahead, and, you know, things which ended up being a discussion of sort of why does the universe exist? Or are these these questions about, you know, the Platonic view of mathematics, these kinds of things, people didn't care about those things, because they were off, you know, building steam engines using traditional using the tower that was being built from mathematics. And I think that that term, I mean, I think it is very interesting to me at least that, that the kinds of questions that we're addressing with with even computational irreducibility, and more so with multi computation and so on, of questions that people have, you know, talked about 500 years ago, and then stopped talking about and so, you know, I do think the thing you know, computation is a very integrative force on science and thinking. Multi computation is another big integrative force, which has the additional oomph, that it gets to use a lot of the results we've got in physics. And so that, and, you know, I think that that's a, that's something very kind of powerful and valuable that, again, the fact that there is a common underlying framework that potentially goes across so many fields, lets you have sort of interplay between those fields, if you if you don't have that common underlying formalism underlying framework, you can't say, oh, I'm going to take something from physics and apply it to economics, I'm going to take this understanding that I have in meta mathematics and apply it to physics. But if you have the same underlying stuff, then you can make those kinds of connections. And I think that's the exciting thing that we have now. And I think that the, you know, the fact that there is a I mean, to me, you know, just as a, as a, as a pure sort of human doing all this stuff. The, you know, at some level wants descending into a great level of abstraction. But I've been fortunate enough to have worked in a bunch of different fields. And so I have some level of understanding, not as much as I would like, but some level of understanding of lots of different fields. And so it's actually possible to see, you know, given the common formalism, I actually have some chance to see how that sort of plays into these different towers. You know, we're just starting this. We're in this strange situation, because this sort of formalism has kind of exploded and potential applications. And so I'm, I'm the current problem is, how do you organize that, because I've, you know, I have a company that's been for the last 35 years, you know, successfully doing sort of very energetic r&d and creating lots of kinds of things. And I understand that ecosystem of how you how you make a company that that innovates, and makes lots of things, I think, we got that one, after, after 35 years, maybe it took us 20 years to figure out how to do that. But we finally got to that. What I tried to do in the physics project, for example, is to apply the same kind of innovation methodology to basic science that I've tried to apply to technology development, and it works great. The only problem is that we've now got this kind of a huge expansion of our product line in the sense that we're seeing, you know, oh, this applies to chemistry, and economics, and linguistics, and so on. And so we're just launching this Wolfram Institute construct, to try and have a, a vehicle for, for having sort of organized exploration of all those different kinds of things. So we get to kind of, you know, we get to live the rules, so to speak, if we've got, you know, by by, you know, understanding the, the, you know, the connections between these different kinds of things.

Joscha Bach 1:37:57
And very briefly at an organizational question, we did plan to have this until nine minutes ago. And I'm super happy and fine to spend more time, but what is your schedule like to be one

Unknown 1:38:12
thing at the top of the hour? And I really need to eat my dinner before that.

Joscha Bach 1:38:16
That makes sense. So this means that we should wrap up in a few minutes. Yes. Yes. First of all, thank you so much for your time, I very much enjoyed this conversation. And what I'd be interested in, maybe is this question of what does it mean to make a measurement in insight of the mind and insight of physics? Does the universe continue to be in a superposition state, after you make the measurement as your mind continue to be in a superposition state, it's just that you're recording of it that you deal with and that you as an agent causally used to interact with the universe is not doing this, or you're basically confined to a branch because you are constructing that branch? Or are you subjectively confined to a branch that actually is not a branch, but it's still the branch yard space?

Unknown 1:39:05
I think that's an interesting question. I do not know the answer to that question. I mean, I think that that's a, that's, I mean, this this question of whether, clearly our brains have definite structures that try to, you know, maintain attention, but tried to have a, you know, that tried to sort of single threaded fie things I mean, that that's a and, you know, in a sense, that's the story of attractors than any kind of system is you go from, from the many possible states down to the particular attractor states and so on. And, but, you know, to what extent that is a subjective phenomenon, and to what extent that is a Oh, you could make measurements of the individual, you know, neuron firings to deduce that I don't entirely know. And I think that there's a, a, you know, as we work towards a more of a sort of a general observer theory, my guess says, Well, okay, so, you know, as a practical matter, and we've been, you know, part of my way of doing science these days is doing it in a sort of, you know, in a radically open way. So we live stream a bunch of our, you know, research working meetings and things so, so people can, if people are curious, you can you can, you can, you can see the, all the wrong turns that we've taken, so to speak. But one of the things we've been looking at is, okay, so for in Wolfram Alpha, we have the world's most complete collection of sort of units that people use to measure things. So about 10,000 kinds of units people use to measure things. And we also have a good inventory of measuring devices by 1000, measuring devices, we know their characteristics. And so the question is, that's raw material for making a theory. Now we have to metamodel what we have there, you know, those 10,000 units, those 1000 devices, what's actually going on. And a typical thing that's actually going on is, let's say you're measuring pressure, the low level molecules bouncing around, you got one paddle that's moving, so to speak, or one nanometer liquid surface, it's moving. And so this is a kind of a story of turning lots of degrees of freedom of the molecules into this one, you know, sort of more in, you know, larger inertia, degree of freedom. And so that's but but I don't know how that generalizes. And that's, that's kind of the thing that we'd like to understand is what, you know, we've got the raw material to understand, you know, sort of, what kind of a thing might measurement be now, for example, or so when you look at quantum computers? There's a, there's a question of, you know, what is what's inside the computer? You know, is it you know, is it an ion trap? Is it neutral atoms? Is it, is it, you know, some squid type thing with superconductors? Or, you know, what is it? And then how do you measure it? And what, you know, what is the actual process? I mean, I looked at this, you know, embarrassingly long time ago, early 1980s, I looked at some sort of quantum computing kinds of things, and was interested in sort of, then, you know, how do you this cascade of measurement, you have a small quantum effect, you have, you know, this, this sort of big amplification of that, what's really going on? What's the what's the, what's the qualitative story? What's the what's the Turing Machine analog, that is the thing that sort of, lets you kind of talk in generality about the measurement process. So anyway, that the I better go have my dinner because I've got to be ready for discussion about something completely different at the top of the hour. Well, actually, the question is how it's about meta mathematics. And the question is, how completely different is it? Really? Yeah, the answer is not as different as what might think. But in any case.

Joscha Bach 1:42:51
Okay. Thank you so much. Wish you a wonderful evening. And thank you so much for the time that you spent with us today. It was quite inspiring. And I hope that we both got some ideas out of it.

Unknown 1:43:02
I certainly did. It was a good conversation. Yeah. Nice conversation.

Joscha Bach 1:43:05
Thanks. Have a wonderful evening. Bye. Bye. Okay. Bye. also like to thank everyone in the audience who have serious today, my apologies that you didn't get around to taking questions from the audience. I'm sure many of you had some. But I was not able to simultaneously listen to Steve and read and the chat. Is there. I think we are close in a minute. But is there any interesting point or question, Tanya, that you saw in the chat that we should be bringing up before we close? Oh, let

Unknown 1:43:36
me take a look at the questions. So there was a number actually. Let's say, let me just go through them in order one.

Unknown 1:43:55
I'm just looking through the question. So what kind of predictions can we expect from this computational model was one of the questions and I think that Stephen partially covered it very nicely with the explanation of how the limitations of our assumptions about the nature of observer imply the types of physics we're going to discover. But I would be nice to think about other predictions that can also be made.

Joscha Bach 1:44:22
I suspect that the most important problems from the perspective of physics is not just how to find new data that we can explain but how to explain to existing things. So how can we explain how relativistic physics emerges from quantum mechanics or what is it that quantum mechanics emerges over why is quantum mechanics debate is why does it appear to us as observers the way it is? And these questions do not have conclusive answers in physics. There are just some vague candidates for these answers. And I think that what Stephen Wolfram is attempting to do what many others are doing and in different departments is to identify these relationships to identify ways to model them to find answers to these integrative questions. There is a difference between describing the world as a multiverse system versus as a deterministic Turing machine. And by the states that are reachable, I think are the same. These there are n according to the normal definition of non deterministic Turing machines versus different deterministic ones. The non deterministic Turing machine is basically going into all possible states at once, which means that the rules by which you're specified, specify constraints rather than the complete description of how you need to go from state to state. And this means that if you are free to ignore how long it takes in your substrate, how much complexity you can put into your substrate to go through all these states simultaneously, if you can do this in the same amount of time, then the number of steps that you take from A to B is going to be the same. But you're going to discover trajectories that you couldn't have discovered otherwise. Or another way to put it, if you want to describe physics, or the rules of the physics of the computer game that you're in, and the computer that you were in as a non deterministic game, then there's going to be much shorter program, because you only need to describe the constraints of going from state to state rather than covering the entire state transitions.

Unknown 1:46:23
Right. Another thing I was thinking about, as I was listening to Stephen, was, I wonder what the implications of this theory of multi qubit computation are for learning, specifically AI learning. So Stephen touched on this idea of not having a word for something and how, you know, the frameworks that are located in different parts of the real system can require hundreds of 1000s of paradigm shifts to get to get to. And so the question is, well, what is the nature of learning? Is this an additive process? Is it a process that necessarily implies that we lose something as we acquire a new distinction? How do we mathematically define it within the paradigm that he's working in?

Joscha Bach 1:47:20
So the thing that I noticed about Stephens work that he is back acting as if he is into giving a new foundation to the sciences, but the sciences are not acting as if they're taking it from him. And I think that's regrettable, because I think he is doing excellent work. It's sometimes I think that he's been treated unfairly because people compare them to the hole of physics that he is trying to displace with his work. And not to individual physicists. They think that as an individual physicist and thinker, he is extremely prolific. But one man, even with the help of a few 100 people that he puts into his company interacts to do things can only do so much. And it's I think, regrettable that there is no direct link and interaction and entanglement that can produce a back and forth between his ideas and what's happening. Nonetheless, I think that the idea that he is discovering, even to the degree that they're not being adopted, are also being discovered by other people. And I not sure to which degree our mind is an artifact system. And if it is, it's probably a leaky one, because there is only so much complexity that you can store in the activation states of neurons. So if you if you see the your brain as the something like the surface of a pool in which lots of waves propagate, and these waves from certain perspectives can be interpreted as particles carrying type information and can be interpreted. And you can have a multiverse system in this way, to some degree as an approximation, right, you could have multitude of possible states, existing and coexisting in parallel performing multiple types of threats in parallel, that you just then interpret from a certain perspective of a local mechanism that exists in the brain and then translates it into speech or into a mental language, thereby collapsing the state space. But are these activation patterns, there's a certain set of saturation that you can have and the activation of the neurons, there's a certain information content in your brain at any given time, and that is bounded. And the multiverse systems are only bounded by the underlying mathematics that is, depending on the rules that you give, this state space grows or contracts or stay stable, but for the most part, it's growing. And they're all mine. It's not growing, it has to remain stable, there is a boundary. So I think that people eventually end up with different descriptions. Our minds will also only approximate multiple systems if they are database systems. Just the question, what is the better approximation? I had hoped a little bit that you could get deeper into this question. But on the other hand, there is not everything that you can cover. And I would also invite people in the audience who linked some of Steve's posts on multiple systems on the roulette and on the preliminaries, they're very helpful to understanding what he means by the branchial space. That's extremely crucial and useful concept.

Unknown 1:50:30
Yeah, so those links were in the description of the event on Eventbrite. And they will be added to the event program once it's on our website. Many of the questions were actually very, very helpfully answered by James Boyd, who joined us from Steven,

Joscha Bach 1:50:49
Steve James.

Unknown 1:50:52
Yes, I don't know if he's still with us. I think he already left the call. But that was most excellent. So I think many of the questions have already been answered. Do you want me to pick up any more? Or should we wrap up for the day? Okay, take

Joscha Bach 1:51:09
one more and then. Okay, great, great. Today, this recording will be made available on YouTube. And you can find the link soon on our website.

Unknown 1:51:19
So this here's a question from Jay. What is the most pertinent meta analysis slash methodology to understand emergence potential as a state of reality seems to be crucial, and even the first state of anything, so how things emerge from potential and all the in between states are modeling the reality how logic allows slash structures, things to emerge from potential seems to be what we can slash need to explore with our tools that are fundamental level through a mathematical theorem like Bayes theorem, for example, because how prediction performs might be the meta solution to understand the architecture of things. So that leads to what is the necessity that brought things to existence? And what are the necessities of merchants?

Joscha Bach 1:52:08
These are, I think, two separate questions. Not all the items would agree because Origins is a very contested topic in philosophy. So but rather than giving you the rundown, I take emergence of your relationship between description systems. Right, so you have a level of description, for instance, where you describe physics of your computer, and then you have a description in which you describe logical gates. And then you have a description in which you describe logical language being executed by this state of the gates as they're switching. And the relationship between those is in relationship of emergence. It's the becoming visible of patterns from a different perspective, from a different level of resolution. And the these emergent systems that we're seeing, they are not real in the sense that they actually make up the ontology of what exists, they are only real to the degree that are implemented by the things that ontologically exist, and they exist as abstractions in your own mind. So for instance, when you think of mental states, they do not exist on the level of individual cells, the individual cells interact with each other in a pattern that is coherent, because this coherence makes the organism more functional, and they evolve to be coherent. And coherent means that you can describe a low dimensional function to characterize the behavior of this whole system. And this pattern that you discover that is much much simpler than the activity of all the cells. Part of that is the mind the mental states and mental states are in their nature, physical laws, very specific physical laws in the same way. So first physical laws. So first basically says, if you will arrange matter in this particular way, for instance, as an iPhone, then the following things will happen every time regardless of where you are in the universe, as long as these boundary conditions are met. Right. And this is the nature of a physical law. So when you ask yourself this, the text editor by which we have in which I write to seem to exist, what kind of object is it in physics, but it's a law, it's a lawful state, there is stuff in physics, and you can describe and characterize what's happening there using these laws. But laws themselves do not exist as objects, they are the result of the way in which things are. And then this leads us to the second aspect of your question, the hypothesis that Stephen Wolfram advances and that I also find plausible is that things exist, because everything that can exist exists. That's the easiest explanation because now allows you again to describe the universe business single bit, or was non right. So it's the most efficient explanation of why we exist. And not everything can exist because of whatever internal contradictions are. So the things that cannot exist, are those things that can be described without leading to contradictions in any kind of language. And what we, for instance, discovered in the 20th century is that many of the notions that existed in classical mathematics, like stateless tools on continuity, lead into contradictions in the languages in which you describe them, and Gridley has shown that some of these contradictions cannot be avoided in any way. And the way out of that is to go to a slightly different RAM than before the finite automata. And it turns out that mathematicians never used anything but this when they compute it and describe things. And so the idea that's involved from logically as is, everything that exists is, in some sense, the interaction of all the finite automata. And this resulting system, the resulting structure that it chooses to formalize is a graph or rather, as a hyper graph. Hyper graph is like a graph, a graph is a set of locations and connections between them. And our hyper graph. These connections are not binary predicates over pairs of locations, but they are predicates over N locations. So they're what sets

Joscha Bach 1:56:11
the top level, they're equivalent. But many of the nice graph algorithms don't work anymore, because they become very hairy. But by and large, it's the same thing. So it's binary, it's a general formula, you can describe almost every single visit, it's very powerful. And you can use this to take this as the foundation of your notation for the universe. And then, in some sense, describes the evolution of the universe is the evolution in these predicates over sets of the atoms of space, the locations, and the transitions that exist, that all the possible regular transitions, all the possible rules that can exist in changing these things. And sometimes these regular changes lead to interesting patterns that will propagate this hypergraph and to the formation of local order and the hypergraph. So we have something like a dynamic fractal that emerges. And the idea is that we live in some reason have a region of this dynamic factor that has the necessary property to contain absorbers to give rise to them. I hope that makes sense, I think, the top of the hour. Yes. I thank everyone for their attention. And I hope to see you all again soon. Thank you very much Tanya for the organization.

Unknown 1:57:27
Thank you, everyone. All right.

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai