Unknown 0:03
Thanks for having us, I think Lucas's instructions to us. I'll just share them so you can contextualize our comments that we were asked to present to us radical ideas that will make you think we're completely insane. But I will put my name next to the five ideas that I'll present and our collective mission is to show you some ideas we think will be real in the next five years that involve the brain. And I think all of them involve just the most current science and some stuff that still has to be invented in the next four or five years, I have the least scientific background of the panel. So I'll just give you my crazy ideas first, and we can hear the better ones in a moment. I have a PhD in cognitive science, and I'm a gadget person, I made many gadgets and mobile companies over the last few years. And I'll tell you about one of my new companies right now, the two big themes that I think are powerful that my ideas connect to one is the power of brain input and output, brain IO in the last 10 years, since I left at graduate school, we can read the brain, we can write to the brain and create images inside the brain. And we can have direct action on the brain to change how it actually functions. The second big vector, which is the one that has driven my career, and mobile phones for Virgin Mobile, and the smartphone peak has been miniaturization and improved resolution of devices devices that are smaller that work with batteries, and that can operate at a distance with radio waves and transmission of energy. So here's my five inventions, and I promise you these over the next five years, one of them I'm working on, it's the first one, we announced it today. It's called Halo neuroscience. And we announced the funding with Andreessen Horowitz and soft tech VC, a wearable device you put on your head that makes your brain work better.

Unknown 1:41
A device to make you smarter is the idea. The second one is software, it uses the front door, the command line of the brain, which are the senses that you already use to gather information and put them back out on a smartphone screen, images, text and sound to influence your eyes, ears and other experiences, to change sleep, monitor how you sleep and then make you sleep using hypnosis, meditation, cognitive behavioral therapy and some of the other techniques that in the past, were things that were merely artisanal things that only magical people might come and show you but now can be algorithmically defined and distributed through software. And now I only give you the third one because I think time is limited, you'll have to find me at the beer garden. The other two, you will really want to hear them. But I just tell you the third one, an embeddable object that fits in your skin, like an RFID tag that finds dogs, very low power that transmits energy, it fits in your skin, maybe behind your ear and transmits energy into your auditory processing system, a thing to help you here by directly stimulating that part of your brain. I think you'll have this device in five years. So these are my three. Okay,

Unknown 2:52
I'm really out of out of my comfort zone. I'm a neuroscientist, academic. I don't have a business the same time, I spent the last six months in a business school. So I was asked by Kellogg School of Business in Chicago to come and teach neuroscience to MBAs. And the idea would be to bridge somehow between what neuroscientists knows what businessmen care about how people make decisions, how you can enhance their thought and what you can do to make better predictions about people's choices. So I'm gonna try to tell you about the list of ideas that I'm trying to my students could be here in the next five years now, I felt really uncomfortable. When I was asked to speak about the future, there's a quote by phenomenon that I really like it says, predictions are very hard, especially about the future. And I'm a little bit uncomfortable. So I tried to be really timed in thinking of the kind of five things that I think are going to be here as soon. So here they are. First, I think that we're going to see less criminals in prison. And a lot of them are going to be medicated. So you can hear a lot of stories in the last couple of months of people who committed mass murderers, going to school and shooting students. And timing again, when you look at those people, we learned that there was some kind of mental disorder attached to this thing. And more and more, we learned that people that do bad things aren't necessarily bad people per se, they actually have some kind of mental disorder that we could maybe cure. And the more we help those people, we can actually send them to different approach instead of sending him to prison and claiming that they're just bad. We're going to start figuring out that there's maybe a way to actually help them and prevent crime by figuring out what underlies this thing. This is one thing. Another thing I think we're going to see a lot of a lot of A is a introduced introduction of neuroscience to the courthouses. I was speaking to a judge recently, who said that a neuroscientist come to judges the time and again and say, Now we have a tool to actually help you understand what people want and they time and again, say that we're not good enough. But in the last three years, they actually started to listen to a scientist invite them to courthouses. I think gonna see more of that, more of that not in the sense that we're going to see lie detectors. But we will see a lot more people that actually can figure out if you're familiar with something. So instead of telling you what you there and how you did it, you can actually see if you're familiar with one of the five items that were used for the crime, and this would be an indication that you've been there or do you know something about it? So more neuroscientists, in courthouses, another place where neuroscientists are going to be a lot of a crank is businesses. So there already is a field called neuro marketing that is kind of going where people are trying to replace focus groups and asking people a question about packages, and about the taste of the product by just looking at the brain. This is called neuro marketing. But now we're starting to see experts of neuroscientists like me going to help board of directors in just making the right choices. We know now that people make decisions based on emotions as much as they make them a bit based on logic. And as we pass the way it's done, we can actually figure out what decision making process good is good for you. Some people make decisions better in the morning, some in the evening, some after lunch, some before lunch, some after they ask many people for advice, somebody only thinks themselves some based on emotion, some based on logic, and each person in the audience has their own preferred method of making choices. And now science becomes good in figuring out what your skills are, and helping you find out what you can be good at. So we can actually recruit people that are going to do better in the in the workplace, and we can help them make better choices based on their own method of figuring out, we're gonna listen to more, and then we're gonna leave it for the audience, because I'll have 10 more when I'm going to have a second round. Another one is sleep becoming a commodity. So now we know more and more about sleep, we spend about a third of our life sleeping. And presumably, nothing really happens, then we know that things happen, but we don't really use that. And now that we know that we can actually affect sleep a little bit, we can actually influence sleep, we can actually navigate dreams. And we can even somehow make you learn content during sleep, we can teach you Chinese while you're asleep. But if you learn Chinese, when you wake up, we can actually strengthen your understanding of it when you're asleep. So now there's more and more uses for sleep. And we've started to see inventions that I'm working on and my colleagues are working on to actually make more use of this seven hours that you spend with your eyes closed and presumably unconscious. And I know that afterwards, we're gonna have Deepak Chopra speaking. And I had the privilege of spending a little bit of time debating him a few years ago, in a conference of consciousness. So I'm going to argue now and he's going to argue against in a second, that we're gonna, over time, learn more and more about the brain, such that we're gonna consume things that are now regarded spiritual, and explain them logically, by looking at the brain, less meditation, and more understanding what's happening in the brain, less communicating with past lives, and just accessing things in the brain by understanding how the brain works. I think that this is something that's going to be more and more because neuroscientists are beginning to understand this placebo effect better and better, and are able to do better just by helping people understand their own brain.

Joscha Bach 7:56
I am an AI person and cognitive scientists. And I think that building systems is the best way of testing theories about the mind, I think that artificial intelligence is our best bet for understanding the mind. And in recent years, AI has made tremendous progress with deep learning, which models some of the perceptual processes that go on in our brains, with probabilistic models and also with cognitive systems, that is systems that try to emulate the functionality of the mind in terms of effect, motivation, perception, and the interplay of all these. And we have started to gain much deeper understanding now of processes, like mental representations and perception, and decision making, and motivation, and emotion and so on. But I don't think that there's a silver bullet, I don't think that full AI that is a system that is able to think in the same way as a human does that is creative, and just the same as a human does, is just around the corner. I think, of course, it's eventually possible. And if we can make it and the few years or decades that we as a technological civilization have for decent research, it's going to happen definitely, but it's not around the corner. And I think that the minds around that we are going to see in the foreseeable future are going to be hybrid minds, minds that to combine human intelligence with artificial intelligence. At the moment, we have systems that if you use them, you have to model their state in your mind. This creates a tremendous cognitive load and it limits the complexity that those systems can have to serve you efficiently. The systems of the near future will model your mind. They will know what you want, they will model your goals, they will model your affective state. They will model your emotion. They will model what you know and what you do not know. They have already started externalizing knowledge when we use Google, we know that knowledge is at our fingertips. We don't need to remember to memorize everything. But what we are going to do in the near future is we will externalize some of our agency that is people become hybrid systems between Humans and artificial agents, people have applications that allow better planning and scheduling between people. Because if people have more seamless interfaces to the artificial systems, then they will also have more seamless interfaces between each other among long organizations and so on. Something else, which I think we are going to see in the near future, are systems that enable us to use our motivation better, if a lot of games now that make us do very boring, stupid stuff, and keep us motivated doing it. And we are just about starting to learn how to harness the research that goes on. And it's pretty stupid gaming industry, for productive things for things that we actually want to do. So in the near future, I foresee a lot of applications that will enable us to determine what your your goals are, and then create an environment which rewards us for pursuing those goals and make us more effective at what we actually want to do at self actualization at interaction with other people and so on. So this is another wave of applications that we are going to see and something else which is also dear to my heart, I think that we are going to see big advances in programming is going to see new kinds of programming paradigms, which make the work that we all do more efficient. That is we will also have symbolic programming something that Stephen Wolfram is right now proposing and starting to propose with this new Wolfram Alpha language. And we also have something like this integrating programming, you know, natural language are very different from programming languages these days. And natural languages, you do not only construct things by piling knowledge on top of each other, but you also disseminate a lot, you imagine that everything possible is given. And then you limit the root space of these possibilities. And I think that we are going to see part of this in programming in the near future. So these are some of the mind enhancements, I think we are going to see, the next few years,

Unknown 12:00
I'm very excited about your augmented information driven connections to the brain and talking about it on our in advance of our panel, I think we should probably start a company together, where we can use your software and our input output mechanisms from Halo to read and write to the brain and actually implement that hybrid mind. I mean, this is the fantasy of a device that's wired into your brain, and calculates pi when you're asked, or that takes straightforward direct stimulation you're already familiar with uses the algorithms for learning but accelerates them and leaves you with a language after the program is run. And I think that fantasy actually is coming closer if you can support learning and sleep. And if you can introduce patterns that you recognize later, in consciousness, I think it's just a series of steps that five years is a fine horizon to estimate.

Unknown 12:57
There's this quote by I think, Bill Gates that I keep putting in the talks, where it says that people overestimate what the world's gonna be in 10 years and underestimate what it's going to be in one year. So I'm a this camp, thinking that five years seems to me like, we're probably going to have just one more little dent on the same things we know right now. But there is one thing that I feel is advancing pretty fast in neuroscience, and pretty slow ethically. And that is this field that I think some people call human 2.0. And the idea where we are far advanced in neuroscience, and not advanced ethically is the following. We now have the ability to read some activity from the brain and know what you intend to do. Meaning when you're about to move your arm to the left, we know what part of the brain kind of gives the older and we can really relatively fast know that you're about to do something, we can, in theory, wrap your head around in the back and connect a robotic arm to your kind of shoulder. And now when you think about moving left, we're going to move this robotic arm left. And we basically teach you very rapidly to control a robotic arm such that you think moving left moves, if you think moving right moves, right you think moving up, it moves up, and you learn to grasp this bottle of water just by thinking. What's interesting is not that we can do that. What's interesting is that once we untie your own arm, you still use the mechanism in your brain to control the robotic arm and are able to both use your arm and this robotic arm. So effectively you gain the third arm. Now we know how to do that right now how to make people gain abilities to have a little more control of say, a third arm or maybe to move their wheelchair with the same part of the brain that moves their hands, which effectively means we can now enhance function. We can take people and give them more and more things. Now evolution is pretty pretty slow. So if I wanted to fly in my lifetime, it would take maybe a couple of millions of years until evolution is gonna give me wings. But now we have the ability to actually put some wings on your back and just teach you how to flap your thoughts in a way to make you fly to get this human 2.0 which is seems like Something that is far from the future, but we actually have the technology to do it. What stops us right now? Is the religious part of us that says, no, no, this is our body, I do not want to do any change to it. And here's an example of that my dad had this little, this little crooked tooth. And he went to a dentist who said, you know, instead of putting braces, it's gonna take like a one year until you line your teeth, I can just remove all your teeth, break them, and put porcelain ones. Instead, it takes one hour, and you get new line teeth. And my dad said, Are you crazy? These are my teeth, you're gonna take my teeth and put process porcelain one. In a way this embodies our feeling. We all know that there's inferior way to replace our body with new things. But we say no, no, this is ours. I was born with this, this is mine. I can't put those new things. And so as science is able to give us many new functions that we no no, no know how to do. We're still lagging in the

Unknown 15:53
face, I completely agree. If I tell you I have a gadget, I can put it on your head and just turn on the power. And it will make you smarter. There is one camp that will raise their hand immediately, especially in a room like this, and many others who will run away screaming, certainly the most conservative and thoughtful of you will be cautious about it. And I think the story is not new at all. It's as old as Mary Shelley and Frankenstein in the novel was written to the very first Italians that worked with electricity on the body. Very familiar fear of what must be the trade offs, you ask me the same point. But as much as the power of these ideas first makes its debut with people who have a problem, something broken, a broken tooth that you replace, the most exciting thing is absolutely augmenting and enhancing the elite, the highest level performance, our highest faculty is our cognition and what we can do with our minds. There are experiences that very few people in the world have ever had transcendent experiences of ecstasy or meditation or enlightenment things that we think are not real. But we're now we're finding these neuroscientific basis for these. If we can invent and deploy technology that can make that kind of ecstatic, transcendent experience widely held, it is extraordinarily exciting. That what would happen if millions I mean, if you think about what literacy did to the human population, just reading and writing, imagine if we could access these higher order functions in our own in our own minds, things that we've never seen.

Joscha Bach 17:09
Okay? The problem with disruptive technologies, of course, is that they are disruptive. And if they go counter our cultural expectations and tradition and inertia, then there are going against trouble example is Google Glass, which gets a lot of flack from a lot of people, which think that's an invasion of privacy or that it turns people into box. So even if it's very efficient technology, it might be that there needs to be a path effect, like with a phone. Now, it seems to be normal that everybody is borked to the iPhone or Android phone or walking through the street and linked to a virtual reality while they're navigating this flesh room. It was possible because without the trajectory effect and so if you want to have a radically new technology and wanting to catch on either needs to be tremendously useful, or it needs to work in the existing environment in a rather seamless way.

Unknown 17:58
So one line before we finish if you have to gamble your money on the next five years, I've been a neuroscience a company what would you do? What would you put your money on?

Unknown 18:08
I think the company Yoshua and I found after this meeting is the one it's the hybrid 2.0 Okay,

Joscha Bach 18:15
okay, if you want to invest address me later. Thank you guys.
