Unknown 0:00
This is just an Editor's Note, I just finished editing and had to add this. There's a fascinating discussion on ontology and how it's related to epistemology, which occurs around the one hour mark. If you're interested in philosophy and consciousness, which you most likely are, given that you're on this channel, then make sure you at least watch that part as ordinarily these two divisions aren't brought together, and it was great to hear about the interrelatedness. Recall that there are timestamps in the description for all the videos. Secondly, the conversation toward the end regarding software as akin to physical law is one that I also haven't heard before. And whether or not I agree with it is another matter. It's at minimum thought provoking. Enjoy this legendary Theo locution between Yoshi Bach and John Verve a key yo Schubach is a cognitive scientist recognized in the field of artificial intelligence as being one of the most unexampled and inventive minds. John Debakey is a professor of cognitive science at the University of Toronto who's one of the few scholars taking an extensive and meticulous cognitive scientific approach to the topics of wisdom, Buddhism and consciousness. Now it's that latter topic consciousness that in more ways than one finds us here today. Click on the timestamps in the description if you'd like to skip this intro, my name is Kurt J. Mongol. I'm a Torontonian filmmaker, with a background in mathematical physics, dedicated to the explication of the variegated terrain of theories of everything from a theoretical physics perspective, but as well as delineating the possible connection consciousness as to the fundamental laws of nature. If those laws exist at all and unknowable to us, if you enjoy witnessing and engaging with others on the topic of psychology, consciousness, physics, etc. Then check the description for a link to the theories of everything discord, as well as subreddit, there's also a link to the Patreon that is patreon.com/kurt J Mongol, if you'd like to contribute as the patrons and the sponsors are the only reasons that I can do podcasts with this level of quality and depth. As now this is what I do full time thanks to their support. With regard to sponsors. There are three. The first is joining us for the first time, and that's the Anegada podcast that is a n a Gog podcast. It's a podcast dedicated to philosophy, psychology and consciousness. Thus, if you like the conversations that we have on this channel with Yoshi blog, Viki, Bernardo kastrup, and Donald Hoffman, et cetera, then it's worth visiting youtube.com/and a gaudy podcast that is a n a Gog podcast. In the latest episode of their podcast, they talk about the foundations of science and the role irrationality has to play in science. They've also spoken to Greg Henriques who has what's akin to a psychological theory of everything called the unified theory of knowledge and Akagi podcast is available on all podcast platforms and it's spelt a n a Gog podcast. The second sponsor is brilliant. During the break, I decided to brush up on some fundamentals and physics. So I committed myself to learning one lesson per day on brilliant. some point soon, I'd like to speak to Dr. Omar Leto on constructor theory, which is predicated heavily in information theory. So I took a course on random variable distributions and knowledge and uncertainty despite previously knowing the formula for entropy. As its hammered into you as an undergrad, it was extremely edifying to see a different explanation of the formula for entropy, but doesn't seem like one that's been handed down arbitrarily from God. Instead, after taking the course, it's easy to see why the formula for entropy is the way that it is and how it's an extremely natural choice. There are plenty of courses including ones on group theory, which is what's being referenced when you hear that the standard model has in it you want cross su to cross su three, those are technically called Li groups, visit brilliant.org/tau T OE to get 20% off your annual subscription. I recommend that you don't stop before for lessons, and I think you'll be greatly surprised that the ease at which you can now comprehend subjects that you previously had a difficult time grokking at least I know I did. The third sponsor is algo algo is an end to end supply chain optimization software company with software that helps business users optimize sales and operations planning to avoid stock outs, reduce returns and inventory write downs while reducing inventory investment. It's a supply chain AI that drives smart ROI headed by Amjad Hussain who himself has a podcast on artificial intelligence and consciousness and business growth. If you like this podcast that toe podcast and want to support then visit on John's podcast link is in the description as subscribing to arm dad's channel indirectly supports the toe channel Thank you and enjoy

Unknown 4:37
I did watch your shows three videos you sent to me and there's stuff in there that I I would I'd like to sort of pick up on so

Unknown 4:45
great, great. Okay, well I will get started on going live.

Unknown 4:50
Last time it was this thing you always forgot to do and then you remember to do it.

Joscha Bach 4:55
Intending this develop Geist Yeah so strange. Sometimes when this happens is because I'm not awake yet. It's just a lucid dream.

Unknown 5:18
So you're supposed to start flying right?

Unknown 5:21
You have a method to greet yourself lucid dreaming.

Unknown 5:25
I used to be able to do it quite readily in my 20s. But as I've gotten older, it's not as not as easy for me.

Unknown 5:33
Okay, so if you can see this type in Ned's Nuit type Ned's Newt. Okay, we're seeing there's usually a 22nd delay between when it actually goes live and when people see it. Ned's Newt? Okay, great. We're live. Welcome. So yoga, why don't we start with what you find most interesting about John's work. And then John, you'll talk about what you find interesting about your service. And then we'll get into definitions.

Joscha Bach 6:06
I find it fascinating that John is a broad thinker that connects many different angles on cognitive science and connects this also directly with the way in which he relates to the world. So for him, science is not just the application of methods in a certain circumscribed area, but it's related to the way in which he connects to others and to himself and to his existence in the world in a way. And this means that in some sense, you can count hold him accountable for his ideas, because they directly integrate with the way in which he thinks about what's actually happening. I recently had a look in his paper on the establishment of relevance in a cognitive system. And he thinks that this is a huge problem. And I'm not sure if this is true, but there might be aspects where we are agreeing or disagreeing. And perhaps this is a good starting point later to get into the discussion.

Unknown 7:03
Great, and John.

Unknown 7:07
So I like that your show is also a big picture cognitive scientist. And I enjoy the fact that he is willing to tackle philosophically challenging topics in his cognitive science. And for me, I think that's much more of that as needed in cognitive science today. Now, he has a very sophisticated model of consciousness and selfhood. And there are many points of it, that I would like to talk to him about. There's some things that are interesting. He talked about, just to connect to something he said about my work, in his mind matters. Talk, he talked about the feeling of what it's like as a primary sense of relevance. And that, of course, tweaked my ears. And then he put a quite a bit of important on attention, and as I do and trying to understand cognition. And so, and also within his discussion itself, he incorporates aspects of narrative. And that's something I'd very much like to talk about with him. So there's a lot that I find very interesting in his work, but like I said, I commend him for the kind of big picture cognitive science. It's it's not as common as it should be to my mind right now. So

Unknown 8:29
Yoshua, from your overview of John's work, what do you see as the disagreements? Yeah, you mentioned that there are

Joscha Bach 8:38
I am not as familiar as I would need to be to point out all the disagreements, also, I don't know how much John's views have changed over the last few years and decades. Typically, when you are thinking about these questions, there is always a lot of movement, in your own mind, I think, and you update on ideas. And so I'm not quite sure what the current disagreements would be. But I'm sure that there are many. Just because of the multitude of things that have to be discussed and the angles that you can take on them.

Unknown 9:12
Let's talk about what the definition of consciousness is, and sentience and mind. So those are consciousness, sentience. And mind. You're sure why don't you start with your definitions of them, then we'll hear John's because obviously, we have two definitions.

Joscha Bach 9:26
Yep, sure. The definitions I don't think that are necessarily contentious points. We just need to anchor them somehow. So we agree on what things we are talking about and what we're not talking about, I think so to me, mind is basically the vehicle in which everything plays out. It's basically the mechanism and substrate that is emergent over mostly the activity of the brain or think and inside of the mind, there happens a model of the world and deserve and the mind also facilitates motivation at some level. And then And the next term that we wanted to talk about is sentience. sentience is the ability of a system to relate to its environment and to discover itself and the environment and establish this kind of relationship, and in this way, learn what it's doing. And I don't think that sentience is the same thing as consciousness, because for instance, it doesn't have to happen in real time. That doesn't need to be an immediate reflexive awareness of this process itself that is becoming aware. In the sense, I think, for instance, that corporations are usually not conscious, I think, but many corporations are sentient in the sense that they understand what the corporation is, how this corporation relates to the world and how it interacts with the world and plans for it. And of course, the sentience of the corporation is facilitated by the people that work for the corporation in this planning role. But sentience is a functional properties that many intelligence systems develop. And consciousness is, Colloquially speaking, the feeling of what it's like it's a as a particular phenomenology, that is, it looks like something to the system that is conscious. And I think that functionally consciousness is largely a control model of the attention of the system. And when we say that a system is conscious, for instance, a cat, or a human being, what we mean is that this system is able to act on a model of its own awareness, which means it knows that it is aware of things, and uses that to drive its own behavior in the moment.

Unknown 11:32
Is that distinct from self consciousness, that it's aware that it's aware,

Joscha Bach 11:37
self is slightly different, because you can be conscious without having a self. For instance, in dreams, you will very often notice that you are conscious, but there is no i. And also in meditative states, you don't need to focus on the AI. What typically happens though, in the type of consciousness that we have is that we know that something is conscious, so we are aware of the awareness, but that doesn't need to have a first person perspective and consciousness. So I would say that first person perspective and consciousness even though in our normal, daytime wakeful state are largely related, actually orthogonal, you can have them independently of each other in a way.

Unknown 12:15
Okay, John, so what are your definitions? Or what do you agree with disagree with?

Unknown 12:20
Well, first of all, there were about the reference before the sense. Yeah, I take it to my mind to refer to although whether or not it forms a unified entity, it's perhaps part of the question. But what when we're referring to mind refer, you're referring to some unity some system by which we are intelligent and conscious. And I take intelligence to be the capacity to be a general problem solver. And I'm not sure what the problem I have with this in cognitive science is the term mind is equivocal, that people use it in different ways, make different identity claims and neuroscientists perhaps saying it's brain function. The AI person might say it's a particular kind of learning algorithm. The psychologists will say it's, you know, that which generates behavior. And the point about this is it's not just a terminological difference. They use different methods of gathering evidence, they make different kinds of arguments, they have different kinds of theoretical entities, the psychologists may talk about working memory, right? The AI person may talk about some aspects of machine learning, of course, the neuroscientists may talk about neural net on various neural networks in the biological sense. So I take it that what I'm trying to do as a cognitive scientist is find out if all of those different definitions of mind can work together, to get back to the coherent unity that we traditionally meant by the word mind. So that's part of the problem. But as part of the fun of trying to do cognitive scientist, it's often very hard to get the anthropologist, The linguist, the psychologist, the neuroscientist, and the AI person to all agree, and you put them in the room. And then usually you throw in philosophers who are supposed to help get all that discourse running smoothly, they often make things more challenging, which is makes it especially fun. So I largely agree with what Yoshi has said, although I want to problematize it. And specifically, it's something that cognitive sciences, asking the question, what is mind is not a clear question anymore. And I think getting clear about what the question is, is one of the tasks of cognitive science. So sentience and awareness, and I tend to have I tend to bind sentience to made sense notion of sentience, which is a wit, I think it might overlap with what she means by awareness. But a sentient system is one that can have some set size up its situation. It's aware of it but not in just sort of the negative sense All right, it can foreground and background information, things like that. So perhaps I think a little bit of a tighter connection between sentience and perceptual awareness. consciousness. Consciousness is usually sort of two aspects. And of course, there's all of this, everything I'm saying here is fraught, and OSHA knows this, right? People talk about two aspects of consciousness. There's one aspect, it's often called Access Consciousness. This is part of what consciousness means is my, like, I can ready things, I can help make things ready for reason, I can make them ready for problem solving. And I can bring aspects of my you know, my skills and my perception and my understanding together. And then there's what's called phenomenal, some people say phenomenological, there's a bit of confusion around that. But anyways, as you're sure said, this is the feeling of what it's like what it's like to be ni here. Now in this situation, it can mean that it can mean something very primitive, like, what is it like to experience green? And this is the so called problem of qualia? And so one way people think of consciousness is the place where called qualia exist. For me, there's two central questions we are asking. And part of what I would argue is we need to integrate them together. And one of the strengths I see of Yoshis work is I do see see him attempting and I don't mean attempting as a as a as an insult. We're all attempting here.

Unknown 16:34
And attempting to integrate these two questions together. One is the function question, which is basically what the hell does consciousness do? Given that so much? So much of our intelligent behavior happens unconsciously? What is consciousness for some people are willing to say it's not for anything? It's just an epiphenomenon, doesn't do anything, it has no function. Yoshi doesn't say that. I'm not saying he does. The other question is the nature problem. How is it that something like consciousness exists in this physical world, which, amongst all these objects that don't seem to have any of these subjective properties, qualia, things like that, at least since the scientific revolution, we separated all of those out from the physical universe, and we put them in this place? Now, I happen to think that you should try and answer those questions together in an integrated fashion. One of the criticisms I have of some of the central theories is they tend to answer one question, while neglecting the other and vice versa. So I think that's my best, I just say a little bit more because he went first. So I had to sort of dig into what he usually said. But that's trying to answer any good definition of consciousness should try and answer the function and the nature questions in an integrated fashion.

Unknown 17:51
John, you said that some people say that consciousness is where qualia exist. What do you mean?

Unknown 17:58
So one way, I mean, this goes back largely to Descartes, and it's picked up by Locke. So Galileo made a distinction between primary qualities, and right, or qualia. And secondary primary qualities are ones that are mathematically measurable, in some sense, like, you know, the length of an object, its mass, things like that. And Galileo proposed that those were real, they were in the objective world. And then there are all the qualia that are not mathematic, mathematically measurable, like the the experience, not the reflectance pattern, but the experience of greenness, the experience of sweetness, the experience of beauty, perhaps, and so for, for Descartes, following up on Galileo, those things did not exist in the world, they existed only in the mind, they were there for only in this subject, they were subjective. And that's qualia. Now, the idea is there's lots of your there's lots of stuff happening in the mind, unconsciously, that doesn't seem to be generating any of that qualitative experience. It only seems to be the case. Or it seems to be the case that not only seems to be it seems to be the case, that those qualia only exist when I'm awake, alert and aware in some fashion. And so they seem to be in consciousness. Now that that is at best metaphorical. But that's how it's many people. Many people take that to be the central phenomena of consciousness, and that the problem of consciousness is largely the problem of answering that. Other people think other. Other aspects of consciousness are essential, like intentionality that consciousness seems to be about things directed at things.

Unknown 19:48
You actually do you have any comments on any of what John said.

Joscha Bach 19:50
So, personally, I don't think that the aboutness is too much the problem but we can go into what we personally find puzzling about the entire affair and In this respect to qualia, I think that there are two aspects that should be kept separate. One is, what is the difference between these elements and features of experience and measurement? And the other one is what makes them experiential, what is experience itself? And the first question is something that became, I think, quite apparent in early work that I participated in, in robotics. He taught little Sony AI robots to play soccer. And in the course of this task, they had to watch balls moving over a field, and we had to segment out the balls. And when the task was set up by the people who develop this game, we already made this task as easy as possible, at least we thought, we made the field extremely and homogenously. Green, there were some white lines on the field, but still, and the ball was very orange. And unfortunately, the ball was a little bit reflecting. And the field was also taking up some of these reflections. And we thought we could solve the problem basically, with a lookup table, where we just put match certain color values from the RGB sensors of the camera of the robot, to whether it's ball or field in this didn't work, we found that the pixels below the ball were more orange than the pixels at the bottom of the ball were not green. So in some sense, if you just did color tables, the colors are in the area where the ball touch the field were inverted. And so we needed to be more intelligent, we needed to figure out ultimately, of whether pixels that we see in a certain region of the field, are probably part of the ball and are probably part of the field. And depending on this context, people would have to reinterpret them. And so I noticed that color is not just a certain wavelengths, or a certain RGB value that you take from your camera sensor. It's an interpretation that is qualitatively bound to the context in which it's being measured. So the property of redness is not just a certain RGB value is given in the context of a red object, the interpretation of the surface properties in the stationary bay of that object, right, so it's a property that attaches to, to an object. And in a certain context, redness is the property that is shared by all the right objects. And you cannot separate redness from this in the processing, if you have changing lighting, and real world lighting. So there needs to be some kind of feature processing that makes that turns a measurement into a context dependent feature that is in multiple dimensions qualitative. So I think it's a happy accident that describes two qualia. It's not actually the reason. But this answers, I think, to some degree, the first question, why is the elements of experience different from measurements and what distinguishes them from measurements? But it doesn't answer the second question, what is it to experience? Why is this thing part of my inner reality. And this has to be explained a different way, it has to be explained by a certain kind of architecture. And this is what some people find very puzzling. That doesn't look that puzzling to me. And we can look into the details of what it looks like. But for instance, one important aspect is that we can learn to deconstruct the qualitative experience of the things that we're looking at. So when we look for instance, at a face, what we typically see is an expression in the face. It's not just a geometrical arrangement of features, but we can stare for a face for long enough until the face SNESs of the face disappears, and the only thing that's left is a geometrical arrangement. And we can go further and let the geometry disappear if you just see colored blobs and flickering and so on. And in this way, we can start deconstructing the elements of our experience. And once we see how they are deconstructed, we can also get a glimpse and how they are constructed in the first place. One of my students once told me, you know, there's the VR VR thing I can see faces in power plucks and Vasari's faces were involved sockets, right? If you look at the power socket interval, you can people can see your face and said, Yeah, most people can do that. Right. It's called pareidolia. It's basically this ability to see

Joscha Bach 24:27
faces and other things in patterns in our environment, and so on. And so use that but you know, there are offices in power sockets. And I told her, yeah, the dark secret is, they also know faces on people. You just project them there, right? It's, they're intrinsically there's just geometry. It's the thing that there is something that you look at another one that looks at you that looks out of their eyes and interpreting the world in a particular way. And you see that in their face. You see in their face, what they feel and so on how they relate to You, this is just a projection that your mind is making, it's not actually a visual feature. It's a high level interpretation of things like the emotional state, and so on, that are all mixed into your interpretation of reality.

Unknown 25:16
So I guess what I don't have any disagreement with that, at least right now, I am in agreement with this idea that when we're talking about perception, and we're talking about doing things in terms of a context dependence, and then the sensitivity to that, the sensitivity to context, context, context, context dependence, I think is really, really crucial. I see that sensitivity as bound up with the capacity for interpretation. Interpretation means being able to, in some way direct your attention, or your awareness to some features rather than others, because you can, of course, take in all possible features of the of the object or the environment, etc. So I guess I see those two processes as a little bit more closely related. And I do think that part of what it's like to experience of face is to find it relevant in a particular fashion, to find it as fitted to that context and fitted to your task within that context. And I think that, also, as you've just said, I think that goes into the perception of it. So I see, I guess, perhaps a deeper interpenetration between the perception and the interpretation that goes around ideas, like I've been talking about about relevance realization. Now, there's, there was an interesting, move me there, and I don't know how fast we want to go ontological. Where there was, you know, the face isn't really there. And it's just a projection. And so I'm not quite sure what that means. Maybe you're shaken? Because I take it, for example, that that would generalize to everything in my experience that I find meaningful. And, like, do I want to say that the various, you know, gauges I'm using in science are just projections? Do I want to say that the other people that are debating with me are just projections? So I get some for me to do? Yeah. But the problem is, is there's an implicit normativity of realness there that. I guess I want. I want to unpack a little bit. Because like I said, I think the point that your show may just generalize this to everything. And then I'm, I have sort of epistemological and ontological concerns about that. Because it might, I might have saying it does, I'm saying it might sort of lead me into kind of a solipsistic skepticism, which makes the very prophet the very attempt to do science itself kind of implausible. So what is it? I mean, surely there must surely maybe not surely, there must be perception that counts as observation of the environment, I take it. And why is it not just a projection? I guess, is my question.

Joscha Bach 28:32
Yes, so this particular point relates to the question of whether faces are part of res extensa. And you have to sort out what we mean by res extends, the typical way in which Deckard is interpreted is that there are two substances out in physics in a way ontologically, at the level at which the universe exists. And one of the substances is stuff in space, the extended things, the objects in the world. And then we have rest cognitions, which is the space of ideas in which the mind exists, and somehow they interact with each other. So basically, the mind exists in a different dimension of the universe and remote controls the physical body, via the pineal gland, or as popper and Akel suggested via the neocortex, which is some kind of magical quantum attend, which talks to the mind in a different realm that is not in physics. And I think this is an misunderstanding that ultimately can be mapped to faulty epistemology. So there isn't a weird perspective on what we think is and in the way in which it is constituted. It's also reflected in the Christian interpretation of the Genesis. And maybe this is not unrelated because it's part of the same cultural tradition, this interpretation of Genesis and the interpretation of Descartes. And in Genesis, we have the creation of a physical To the universe by a supernatural being in the common interpretation, and it starts out with the creation of light and darkness which are separated from each other, and then the creation of sky and ground, and then the plants and the animals eventually, and then they all get their name. But we do know that sky and ground are not physical entities. And colors are not in physics, there are constructions that only happen in our mind. And if you look at foundational physics, we see a weird quantum graph that has a very complicated properties among them apparently, the property to throws regular patterns that are systemic interface so our brain can find regularity in them and part of these regularities, that our mind is discovering and quite reliable base is darkness and brightness, and sky and ground and plants and animals and giving them all their names, which is cognitive development. So the universe that you and me are interacting this exponentially. And also intersubjectivity is not a physical universe, you're not talking about entities in physics, when we talk about the universe to each other, we largely talk about entities in our experience. And now it turns out that is experienced that our brain is constructing for us to relate to, which is a coarse graining of the patterns that the physical universe throws at us contain two types of entities. And one group of entities is what we could call stuff in space. It's like a physics engine and a computer game. So we have three dimensional, basically Euclidean space in which we have extended objects that occupy volumes. And these objects can be solid or liquid, or gaseous, and they displace each other. And they have all these properties that we would call rest extends. But this res extensa is geometric, it's mechanical. It doesn't want something, it's just moving in a mechanical way. And so when the student said that there are no phases in power sockets, what she meant is that the physical thing the rest extends, I think the geometrical thing, the face is not really on the power plaque. And I pointed to out that the face itself is not a geometrical thing. So when you see a face, what you see is not actually a geometry, it's not part of something that you would construct with a 3d program. What you have to construct is a certain part of risk cognitive science, it's a certain interpretation of a high level feature, that is already a mental feature that we see this intentional entity and the world expressed by its interface to the world. And so I think this way we can join and be probably agree on a way in which we disassemble the category or at least make the next step. And so I would agree that, of course, every entity that we make out in the universe, ultimately is an imposition that our mind was making this imposition is not necessarily an arbitrary one, because the universe cannot be efficiently encoded in every possible way, there are certain ways in which the encoding makes sense, and others where it doesn't help you to interpret the world. So the way in which we may draw the boundaries between objects is not arbitrary, but the boundaries are drawn by our mind.

Unknown 33:21
Okay, so um, of course, you're aware of that. I mean, first of all, I comment, I do think there's a deep connection between the Christian models, which is sort of a two worlds mythology, and Descartes dualism of mind and body. So I think that's an accurate historical observation. I talk a bit about that connection in my awakening from the meaning crisis series. So in fact, I often talk about Christian Cartesianism as the as the link between those. So I think that's a good a good historical observation. Of course, the deep problem with finding that division of res extensa. And res culture tends to be the sort of final note on your ontology is the problem that beset Descartes, which is the problem that Spinoza immediately recognized is that there's no possible causal interaction between these domains. And you get the separation of reasons from causes and you get all of these kinds of kinds of problems. And so I take it that there is something fundamentally wrong with the ontology, if it's giving us that kind of deep, I mean, it strikes me as absurd to say that my mental states whatever they happen to be in my physical states are not causally interacting with each other on an ongoing basis. And you know, that if I if, if I presume that kind of dualism, then of course, I can also pick up on your mental states because all I get is your bodily behavior, etc. And if there is no causal relationship between your mental states and your bodily behavior, then of course I can't pick up on other minds. And so I mean, you I know you know this, because you've mentioned it in one of the one of the talks. I mean, that ontology is, though, is deeply problematic, because it generates these really, really powerful and perfect

Joscha Bach 35:18
dualism is very difficult to get to work. And I think that the solution is relatively simple. Whereas extensa and West cognitive, it's both exist in the mind, there are just different domains in which we make sense of the world. One is this mechanical level of geometric perception. And the other one is hidden states, of attentional systems that animate part of this world. And the, when a meditator believes that the rest COVID tense is separate from rest extends, and rest extends us out there and the physical world and the experiencing the physical world. And they managed to go to this state of reality construction where this boundary between self and world is obliterated. And they suddenly noticed this unity of the system, and oh, my God, everything is consciousness. They became pen cyclists. Right? It's it's a fundamental confusion that results from this error in the ontology. And when I was young, I stumbled on the same issue, as you just mentioned, if you are a duelist, how does this interface between the causally closed physical universe and the mind work? There are some solutions to this, like, for instance, occasional ism, which means they just happen to be synchronous, but there is no direct connection between them. And ultimately, this is a form of EPIPHENOMENALISM. So it would not be a violation of the causal closure of physics, if your ontologically separate mind will be reading it, but wouldn't have right access, right. So you could have this physical universe mechanically clicking by itself, but you could have the mind looking at from the outside. But as soon as the mind writes, you should be able sometimes to see certain violations of the conservation of energy or the conservation of information in the lab. And apparently you don't and pop an angle so that it's possible to basically hide this in the randomness of quantum events, but still would need to be a systematic violation. So I don't think that this would work. And the attempts to solve this problem, I think that they, they don't work out. So I thought there is two possibilities. One is either we are in an entirely mechanical universe, and there is no conspiracy going on. Of course, it's also possible that the mechanical universe is in some kind of simulation, right? So we could be running in some kind of nerds computer, and that is stationed in the next level universe. And of course, this nerd could also interact with our world. And in a sense, dualism in some sense might be possible. It could also be that our minds indeed, run on a separate machine, and interact with it. But in this sense, every supernatural thing would have to have a natural cause at some level in one of the parent universes, just unfortunately, this intermediate level could be a symbolic one. And the symbolic universe is a magical universe. Right? If you have a magical interaction that for instance, in Minecraft, you can open aperture and us can say times a day in the sunrises, and there is no process visiting the cellular automaton of Minecraft that explains this mechanical, you would have to go a level behind that and understand the way in which the Minecraft universe is constituted as some kind of simulation and simulacrum and part running on your computer in a parallel universe that allows you to do magic. But step back the alternative to the mechanical universe of physics and physicalism is the idea that there is a mechanical universe happening in based reality. And we are directly emergent over that base universe. So we don't live in some kind of simulation, that that is physicalism. And the alternative is you live in a dream. And in the dream magic is possible. In your dream, it's possible that you can break the laws of physics, it's possible that you can have telepathy in a way that violates the Standard Model. And you can have ghosts and you can have all sorts of weird things for which you cannot possibly have a physical explanation. Maybe for some of them, there are physical explanations, but by and large, this is the main boundary. And when you look at the philosophies that exist, there are basically these two types of big philosophy Chol approaches that exists in the history of humanity that are either fully monolithically idealist and save it will live in a dream. And the idealists have to explain why this dream looks in many parts so damn regular and mechanical. And the other group says the universe is entirely mechanical and this group has to explain why so many magic things seem to be happening. And then we have to find an agreement which of the things are mechanical in which of the things are magical and why? Right and And at some point, it became apparent to me that we obviously do live in a dream. But that this dream would have to be dreamt by some kind of mind in a higher plane of existence, probably in some kind of mechanical fashion, because you need functionality that facilitates the interaction of the elements and your dream, because it's not random. It is also apparent when you have a lucid dream. Or once you observe a number of your lucid dreams, you notice how they are composed you notice some of the mechanisms of of lucid dreaming, you'll notice some of the limitations of how many elements can be stable for how long and you lose the dream, and so on the ways in which you interact with STEM. And so the lucid dream itself becomes apparent as something that is facilitated by mechanisms. And so what would be the properties of that higher plane of existence, and I think this higher plane of existence is physics. Right? physical systems cannot be conscious, only simulated things can be conscious consciousness is a virtual property. It's simulated, it exists in the dream. And the system that dreams as, according to our best theories right now is the brain in physics. And the confusion that we have about this, when we think about this arises to the notion that what we experience when we look at brains, our brains, but you don't, especially pink, things are elements of our dream, that are generated in non random fashion in the parent reality. And the parent reality is something that we can never have access to, we cannot experience physics, there is no way in which the physical world can be experienced from inside of a brain.

Unknown 41:37
So wouldn't that mean, then that there is no knowledge of the physics possible then?

Joscha Bach 41:43
No, that's, that's what it means. We can have knowledge from first principles, which means we can understand the way in which thinking could possibly happen, which means understanding the realm of all languages, and the way in which something could mean something. That's one aspect. So we have a priori knowledge, which is a category of ideas that we get by understanding how systems can be about other things, you can understand how languages work. And the other thing is that we can make observations and we can identify regularities and the observations and then using our understanding of first principles to get a notion of what the significance of these observables is. And so I think it's a good simplification to say that we find regular patterns at our systemic interface. And in these regular patterns, we find non random ways to disassemble them and build them into hierarchies have features and objects.

Unknown 42:47
I don't know if I don't know. I made myself clear what I was trying to get at. Are you maybe I should ask question. Are you proposing that you can do physics are Priore? Because that doesn't seem to be the case. We tried to do physics out priority, that's Descartes project and it collapses. You can't do physics prior or you seem Did you say and then you said we can observe regularities, which I think is what's physics does. But that means you're saying that regularities are really there. And then I guess the problem becomes, what privileges those experiences have, I mean, I can have to use your analogy, I can have regularities in my dream, and I don't take them to have given me an account of how the world really is. But if I do say that regularities work, what is it about them that gets me outside of the simulation, I'm worried about, I'm worried about a problem of skepticism here, I'm worried about a problem of right and like, because this is what, you know, this is what Hume does, he says, Well, you know, you've got all these regularities, but those regularities are themselves only projected by the mind. Their causation is just association between ideas and experiences, and therefore I really can't know the world and context cetera. And so I guess, I'm wondering if there seems to be, I mean, to say things, or a projection is to say that other things are real, because it's a contrast term. To say that everything is an illusion, for example, doesn't make any sense. It's like saying everything's tall. Right? So I'm trying to get at what is like, what surely we must have experiences that count as access to the real or else we are just locked inside an attorney and internal self referential system. That's what I'm, that's what I'm asking. Did that make sense?

Joscha Bach 44:40
Yes, but let's start out with one of these aspects that several points that we I think would need to address and some of them are veritable rabbit holes. So let's start out with the problem of skepticism. Personally, I don't see skepticism is a problem because I think that when I I'm observing the positive trajectories that my mind can take. There is not usually many points where I open the door and go through and I cannot go back.

Joscha Bach 45:11
Right? It's not that I, in the course of intellectual exploration goes one way towards, that I can see before and I say, I cannot come back, this might exist in some religions. So here's is wonderful delicious brain worm you take it on, and you can give it back in three weeks from now. And ideologies of usually work in such a way that a warp your mind in such a way that you get cut off from the rest of human thought space and you cannot come back. And I think that in a rational world, this cannot happen. So when you think rationally, everything that you think is conditional on something else, and so everything that is not impossible is possible. And the confidence among the possible things has to be disputed, distributed according to the evidence that is available. So the possibility that nothing exists in the way in which I perceive it, and I don't exist, and other people don't exist, or only I exist, and only other people exist, is always a possibility. And there is nothing scary about it. And they don't need to be worried about it. There are no assumptions that they need to make to avoid this. So I never fall into this trap and never come back. Oh, my God, no, it's not not a problem, the possibility that there are no other people should be considered. And I should see what observations suggest that this is the case and which observation speak against it. And if I ever find out that there never been other people, why should I be surprised? Right? It's, I should consider this I should see how deep the rabbit hole goes. There's nothing scary about it's not infinitely deep, they're not infinity, many conclusions that I will draw from this, this will not lock me in an inhospitable place of the intellectual universe, if I consider this path. So I would suggest basically consider the entire space of possibilities. And the idea that there are other minds in the world that are constituted in a quite similar way to mine, but have a larger diversity than some people might be willing to acknowledge, at first glance, and so on. Right, this seems to be a good theory, there seem to be the other objects that look a lot like me, in this mind, and they seem to be like me, the side effect of the regulation needs of the hairless monkey in the present universe. And this is all it's a good theory, it gives good predictions, it's a useful encoding of the patterns that are thrown at my systemic boundary. And this, there's another aspect to solipsism, which is more an exponential one, this is, if you cannot perceive other minds as minds based on the priors that you have. Most people don't learn a lot of wisdom in their life, and that the wisdom they have is largely a structure that is innate to them, they are lucky to be born by us. And they just converge the observation of the world to more details and in this structure, and so on people that are born, and why is it difficult to ever get to wisdom. So we do learn new structure. But largely, the architecture that we use to interpret the world seems to be something that is, to a large degree innate, that is mapped to the circumstances that our ancestors found themselves in, in the world. And what we notice, for instance, many Europeans that live in the US have all these weird quirks in which they relate to the world that are the remnants of non existent European societies that they're brought within their own minds and the structure that is built into their soul over many generations. And now, they try this in this very brutish and veered pioneer society, that is the US. And many of these patterns don't make sense. And this is not just the case for Europeans, it's just for Europeans, I can notice and interpret these patterns better than for other cultures that are part of this hodgepodge of the US. So it's very interesting to see that solipsism might be a property of some people, I sometimes think that our previous president has been a solipsist. Not in the sense that he's an evil person. I think it's psychologically interesting that when he talks to other people, his important criterion was always He can say whatever he wants, as long as he gets away visit and communication is a tool to get what he wants. And to seems to be somewhat in variant in politics, but he beelines for it, right, he is able to think outside of a box because he never acknowledged the existence of this box. There is a certain prior that there are other minds that he needs to see a true service that is absent. He can just say whatever he wants, he's free to do this because there are no other people. There's only something like an almost faceless audience that relates to him in a particular way. And that he relates to in a particular way that makes him fit for this particular wall was probably advised to to make this tangent because I don't want to make a normative statement one way or the other about Trump who just think that he happens to be somebody that we all know and who's psychologically interesting because I think he might be a solipsist and an expert into the functional, not necessarily philosophical sense.

Unknown 50:04
So don't worry your show, I'm not going to draw you into any kind of political debate around Trump. So that that would be unfair to you and unfair to the spirit in which you offered the example. I'm trying to think of what how to reply, because you said about 7000 really interesting things in that last thing. But one thing I seem to pick up on, was that, you know, reality seems to be determined by rational processes of making sense. Which, I mean, and that's a classical kind of idealism. That's sort of like a galleon idealism that ultimately the real is dependent on on the on the capacity for rationality. And so rationality has to be as real as anything else, because of that dependency relationship. Now, the thing about that is rationality seems to be a quintessential mental property to. And does that mean, that we don't have any, you know, you know, you know, there's two I know, you know, again, I've seen your talks, you know, the problems of deep time that idealism faces, right, the problem with deep time, you know, there seems to be a significant difference between Darwin discovering the theory of evolution in 1859 process of rational reflection, gathering the evidence, and the process of evolution that actually led to Darwin's existence. Right, they have different they have different temporal, spatial extensions, etc. And so the problem I guess, I'm trying to get at is, when I'm talking about it that way, doesn't that mean that I have to take it that that rationality really exists, since my ability to determine what is real is dependent on my rational processes, like you said, that our theories were theories, making better sense, etc, etc. And then that seems to indicate a very high level of organization at which things can be real, rather than just what is typically taken to be the physical, I take it that, at least traditionally, at least currently, rationality is not part of the ontology of physics. It's presupposed, in the practice of physics, but is not part of the ontology. And so that that means it sounds to me, either, like you have a kind of strong idealism, or because you brought this up as another possibility. You see rationality as emerging, perhaps out of intelligence and intelligence emerging out of the behavior of the brain. But it wouldn't be an EPA could not be given this argument at epi phenomenal emergent, rationality would have to be a real thing that really exists and really directs people's behavior in some fashion. How does that land with you or have I misinterpreted you.

Joscha Bach 53:03
So we probably have to agree on what we mean by rationality, to be able to disassemble this term a little bit further. Typically, it's the ability to reach a certain goal in which in which you have reason to believe that these tools that you use are suitable to get to that goal.

Unknown 53:22
It's I would add, in addition to the instrumentality aspect of rationality, that rationality includes a capacity for self correction. So the system has to be able to correct itself as its pursuing these goals and be able to seek out more reliable means of achieving achieving those goals. So the so the system is inherently self correcting, which means in a very important way, the system has to be self transcending in some fashion, it has to be able to exceed itself, it has to be able to grow, it has to be able to develop, there's something

Joscha Bach 53:53
I see this part of the instrumentality, I don't think that if you are in a suitably complex environment with complex tasks that you can be believed that your strategy is the only suitable one and doesn't need some kind of mechanism of self correction. So self correction, I think, falls relatively early out of the instrumental notion.

Unknown 54:14
I don't have any problem with that. I just want to I'm just wanted to point out that that's often not explicated in accounts of instrumentality. So I go ahead,

Joscha Bach 54:23
but I don't think that rationality in this sense is necessarily a thing that exists as an object, but it exists as an archetype. It exists as a strategy that I can specify from some basic desirables for any kind of system that is strategizing on solving a control problem in a complex world. So, basically, if you have a system that is AI has the ability to error correct on a deep level and that is able to discover enough regularities in the world to notice its own existence in the world. Then this system as soon as it's able to evaluate strategies that it applies to make sense of the world will discover rationality as an option. And there are not that many alternatives to it. And when you think about how to be in Rational idealist, right if you are a deep idealist can you afford to be rational? There is, in some sense two possibilities in which you are an idealist. One is an idealist that is willing to deal with the fringe problem of idealism, like why is the regularity in there and where does the dream come from? And the alternative is Mysterion ism. And Mysterion ism is a position in cognitive science that is held by several people. Mysterion ism basically says that something cannot be understood if it cannot be understood by Noam Chomsky. Not surprisingly, Chomsky himself is a mysterious devout consciousness.

Unknown 55:55
Yeah, and I think yeah, I think begin does similar things. For me before we, I don't want to get too far afield about this. I think there's equivocation around Mysterion ism. It invokes I think, a noncontroversial notion of epistemic boundedness. Like every other organism, it's highly probable we are epistemic ly bounded. And then it claims we're epistemic ly bounded with respect to to the mind, like having a mind doesn't mean that the mind is capable of explaining itself. And that, of course, I don't think chimps will ever generate a theory explaining their own cognition, etc. I think that's not uncontroversial. The problem is the specific argument saying that that is actually occurring in our attempts to solve consciousness or intelligence, etc. So I think I Well, I agree about the egocentrism of some of the arguments that you've pointed to. I think there's also a deep equivocation there between different senses of epistemic boundedness. That hasn't been sort of properly worked out very carefully. Of course, I think, like I said, in one sense, it's got to be non controversial. I think that we're epistemic ly bounded, even younger versions of myself, were epistemic ly bounded with respect to these problems and questions. The idea is, how do I how do I distinguish between epistemic boundedness that is sort of hardwired into me, cultural epistemic, boundedness, historical epistemic boundedness, developmental epics, that epistemic boundedness. And so I find that that whole argument, sort of deeply confused, because there's a lot of equivocation going on. So I take it that you don't like it either. So what I think

Joscha Bach 57:42
it's, it's maybe an unhelpful notion, because in the way in which the term is constructed, is suggests that there is indeed a heart bound. And the question is, is this a useful way to think about the way in which my experience works, so maybe chimpanzees are just stupid people. And because they have a very short childhood, so they, before the brain loses neuroplasticity, and all the respective levels where they would be able to form concepts, it already solidifies. And they're not able to make sense of the world at Desert beyond a certain depths, because it's for them difficult to focus on these ideas for long enough and to build suitable representations about them. And the similar thing happens with people, most people are unable to focus on an idea for more than 20 minutes if it's not related to the social or erotic success. And so you need very weird people that are able to focus on certain ideas for very long, and then we already die after a few decades. It does this imply that there is a hard epistemic bound? Probably not. And there could be a harder epistemic bound that is we can figure out by the timing characteristics, how many layers our brain effectively has our brain is not organized and neat layers, it's recurrent, and so on. But still, it seems to be difficult for us to hold thoughts beyond a certain length or construct thoughts beyond a certain length that's, for most people very difficult to hold a thought in their mind stable that is longer than a few 10s of seconds. And some people are able to hold the thoughts stable in their mind that takes a few hours, but it means uninterrupted focus on the thought. And so if you think about how many oscillations can you fit into such a thought is is the level of complexity that this model has sufficient to understand foundational physics, for instance, and it could be that foundational physics poses a few questions that are close to the boundary of what we can integrate all at once and that we need machines to extend our mind to keep the thought stable and detailed for long enough. I think it is unfair to expect from the heart that he's able to solve foundational physics because there were many things fundamental insights that were not available to him that were not part of what he had time to figure out by himself, and that were not available to him in books and ideas around him, he largely still lived in Euclidean universe in which the objects were very large, and in which it was not apparent how to build more simple automata over which the complexity of the three dimensional, approximately three dimensional Euclidean world or space time later on foot emerge. So, in this time, there was no way to go to to understand the emergence of physics from something that is more simple and closer to first principles. And I think this is only just now happening.

Unknown 1:00:42
I think that's what I was trying to say. And issues of epistemic boundedness are mixing up and confusing together, biological issues, cultural issues, historical issues. Yes. Right.

Joscha Bach 1:00:54
So maybe epistemic boundaries is not a thing. So that was my point. So it might exist approximately. But if you treat it as the oh my god, there's this boundary, there it is. That's the wall that separates us from from the next country, and we will never be able to cross it because this is, for some natural law, the reason in which human minds have to be constructed, I'm not sure if you can actually make that claim, if you can prove that there is a boundary that we need to run against.

Unknown 1:01:21
Well, this is Hegel's argument. And maybe I can use that to circle back because he goes argument is you can actually only talk about a limit, if you have the capacity to exceed it, it doesn't make any sense to say from justice side that there's a limit.

Joscha Bach 1:01:36
So there are boundaries. One is there is loops theory, which says that a system basically cannot make statements about something outside of itself. Also, the way in which griddle, for instance, talks about the hole of mathematics and these properties of mathematics works by building an automaton that reconstructs the hole of mathematics that he wants to talk about from first principles. So it talks about something that is contained in the system. If I want to talk about the hole of mathematics, I have to talk about it by reconstructing it from first principles. If I cannot make such a definition, I don't know what I'm talking about. So the world that I'm talking about is one that I need to construct in the first place. And I'm not able to talk about something that exists outside of these constructions, unless I can prove that I have constructed things in the only possible way, which means I have to make statements about the possible nature of language itself. So this is one of the boundaries that I can run into. And the other one is has to do with the prompt of the access to of the universe itself. And this is much more obvious to people than loops theory, even though it's related, you cannot exclude the possibility that, for instance, that you could be a brain in the vat. Some philosophers have tried to do this, but they are afraid of hands and wishful thinking. There is no way that you and meek cannot know beforehand of whether we are currently in some kind of VR dream for which we wake up in the next moment and realize, Oh my God, this actually didn't happen. It was a fake memory. This was not true. This is not a description of the physical universe, this was just a weird illusion that I had in a dream, there is no way in which we can, in principle exclude this possibility. There is only ways in which we can deal with the probabilities based on our past experiences. But if we have never experienced a certain thing before in this fundamental way, for instance, after I had a long surgery for eight hours, I had extremely lucid dreams that that were so intense that I could not in the intensity, distinguish them from daytime experiences. And there was because of the narcotics that were still in my bloodstream, and I never had experiences like that before. Of course, these experiences for just brain states, they had nothing prophetic about this. This was not an alternative universe that it was dropping in. But the experiential qualities were very similar. And so my argument is that you can not possibly make such a distinction beforehand. And that's why you can also not exclude the possibility of skepticism. And this is one of the boundaries of what we can be achieving as a mind. We cannot rely on our own coherence. In a fundamental sense, we always have to hope and pray that the world remains as coherent as it appears to me right now in the next slide.

Unknown 1:04:31
So that that gets that gets me back to the point, that realness seems to be bound to some normative notion of rationality, you've invoked a priori a couple of times. The problem with our Priore is again, that hasn't been stable, what Kant thought was our priori, and he famously positive the afro array, right as Central. You know, many people don't agree With his a priori that you know that logic that logic is Aristotelian logic. There's many logicians that say no, that's not the only possible logic. Euclidean geometry is the only geometry. That's not true, etc. And so again, it seems that even the AP Priore is dependent on these more basic processes of how we think everything's hangs together, how everything is intelligible, how it all makes sense to us. And for me that that's the thing I really want to understand. I really want to understand how and why we find the universe intelligible? And if we're justified in doing so, and then how does that relate to intelligence and consciousness? That's the, that's the issue. And I take it that there are sort of certain central problems that go back to this fundamental act of interpretation, which is, what are you going to pay attention to? How long are you gonna pay attention to it? How much importance are you going to give to it? How are you going to prioritize one thing over another, etc. And, interestingly enough, these are kind of the a lot of the contending candidates for theories of what what attention is. And I know you put a lot of centrality on attention in your men in your model of consciousness. And so I'm very interested in AI, about this process, by which we attend to things in the right way. So that we are capable of making intelligible sense of our experience in a way, that gives us some good reason. I'm not saying demonstrative ly certain, but some good reason it can be probabilistic, if you want for saying x is real, and y is not. Because if we can't do that, if we can't make those basic kinds of distinctions, we can't do science itself. And then a lot of the data that we're using to make our arguments falls to the bottom, because we have no ontological ground for science itself. So I'm very interested in exactly those kinds of fundamental issues of how, so for me, the problem of consciousness, ultimately, is bound up with the problem of intelligence, the problem of making sense, but those are not just psychological problems, they are ultimately epistemological ontological problems. And answering them together, I think, is something well, that's what I'm trying to do with you here. Now I'm trying to get how it is that I'm trying to get your model of ontology. And where because you do you have to rely on judgment. So like, we went back, it's only a projection, there's not really a face there. That's a that's a positing of what's real, versus not real. And I'm trying to get at is your account of rationality bound up with your account of consciousness and intelligence? It seems like it is. And doesn't that mean, therefore, that we have to posit a certain kind of realness to intelligence and consciousness the way we have to for rationality? Because rationality is how we determine what's real in the world. Again, I acknowledge with you, I'm not saying that I can do that, you know, with any kind of certainty. But nevertheless, I have to be able to do it in some kind of fashion, I have to be able to make judgments about real versus not real, in order to be generating the kind of data we're both using when we're talking here right now. So here's the argument in a nutshell, it seems that what's real depends on what's rational and being rational seems to require some kind of self awareness, not some kind of consciousness. And rational seems to also require some kind of basic ability to be intelligent, to find certain things relevant rather than others to pay attention to hear, to see the relevance of certain acts to goals, etc.

Unknown 1:09:29
And doesn't that mean, therefore, that consciousness and intelligence and rationality are just as real as anything else that we posit to the real

Joscha Bach 1:09:45
question is what is real, then? It's a tricky question. It's one question. Yes. The property of being exponentially real requires I think that it needs to be in our mind. So they is no way in which you can wake up from the dream in your mind and still exist because out there in physics, you are not conscious neurons are not conscious brains are not conscious, physical apparatus are not conscious, you need to be inside of that dream. So if you ever transcend the dream, you will not be there, the experience of waking up is something that you dream, you can only experience waking up value are still in a dream. And so you're not going to wake up in some any kind of reality. And there is this big question why there is something rather than nothing, it seems to be hard to deny that something exists. And it's difficult to figure out how it's possible that there is something rather than nothing. And the easiest explanation that the foundational physicists that I have so far been talk to have come up with is always the same. So rather than positing that for some funny reason, something exists, and all the other things do not exist. Maybe existence is the default. So for some funny reason, the universe is not set up, as our intuition says that, basically, nothing exists by itself by default. And then something needs to be brought into existence somehow from first principles. The an easy explanation is to reduce the step is to say that, well, just everything exists. And we have to now explain why something don't seem to be the case. And so what would it mean for something to exist in my understanding for something to exist, it needs to be implemented. And I would say that many things only exists to an approximate degree. So for instance, this cap here exists to a very good approximate degree, right? It's a certain idea that I can project consistently in the universe, that gives me certain affordances. And it's stable for a pretty long time. And they're well defined conditions for the most part, for when this model falls apart, and they can no longer treat this as a cup. And, for instance, when it breaks, or when my ability to interact with it breaks or when the local physical continuum breaks in such a way that the parts no longer neatly assemble into a cup and so on. Right, so there are certain boundary conditions where the cabinet's would no longer hold. But for the most part, the cup is very stable. If I take rationality is an object become slightly more fishy. Or if I take my own personal identity as an object, my own existence, it becomes super fishy. Because to which degree do I really stably exist, and to which degree is this a fiction that I conveniently maintain to be able to reason about myself over extended time spans, I think that I probably don't exist in to the same degree of solidity. As the cup exist, and much more approximate and much more like a voice in the wind blowing through the mountains, my existence is much more virtual and vague, and approximate than the existence of the cup itself. If I go back to this notion of why there's something rather than nothing, and all these things that can be implemented exist, that cap is implemented in physics, to tighter degree than I am implemented in physics, I'm much more approximately implemented, I would say that what can be implemented are ultimately finite automata. It's also the only part of mathematics that works. That's the implication of girdles discovery, that we have to go away from stateless mathematics. And instead, what we get are automata. And we cannot define infinity without running into contradictions in the languages in which we do it. You mentioned that there are many different ways to define logic and different logics. Ultimately, they come down to the same thing that was also part of this big discovery that you made in the 20th century, that all the ways in which we can define logic and computation and so on are the same. They have all the same power. So the Turing machine and the post machine and the lambda calculus and the combinators, and Boolean logic and specific programming languages and the different approaches to define constructive mathematics turn out to be equivalent,

Joscha Bach 1:14:12
some tight small elements at the boundaries and so on, where we could get into debates. But by and large, they all turn out to be a day, I guess, mappings between these systems. And these mappings can all happen in polynomial time, or in constant time. And so it's not so bad. The logic can be solved. If you look at geometry, there is not this question. Oh my god, that is not just Euclidean geometry, but there's also non Euclidean geometry. These are not fundamentally different. It's just that the non Euclidean geometry relaxes one of the conditions which means the flat space in which geometry takes place doesn't need to be flat, the space can have curvature or it can be a you can go beyond this and you can be very irregular and so on. And it turns out that geometry is the mathematics of too many starts to count, as think. So as soon as you have too many parts to count, the way in which we can perform calculations is that we need to identify operators that converge on the limit, which means if you have trillions of parts, and you add one more part, the result doesn't change perceptively in any way. And this is when you will have something where you converge approximately against infinity, when you have approximate continuity, and the set of operators that converge in the limit, when you have too many parts to count. This is practically what we mean by geometry. So it's a particular way to model worlds that are made of too many parts to keep track of the individual parts. And of course, our brain is largely confronted with the world at such a level, where there are too many atoms to count too many molecules, too many people to count, too many dollars to count, and so on. And so we treat them as continuous values. And we look at the limit dynamics and view of geometric models.

Unknown 1:15:58
Two points. The first is, I'm not going to make arguments about the interrelations of logic, I was making an argument that Kant took something to be a priori, he didn't know everything you just said. And so his judgments about what was the a priori were incorrect. It's plausible that that's also the case for us. And so that's all I meant to say about that. I want to go back to the cup, and me, or the cup, and you, because it seems to be given your ontology and epistemology the cup is, and I think you're saying that the cup is a fiction as well. And so your affection, the cup is a fiction. And yet, the physics seems to not be fictional for you. And yet, I don't know how we get to the physics without objects, like cups, and people like you and I, the physics is generated by people like you and I, using instruments that are like microscopes, and whatever that are just like the cup. And therefore, how do all these fictional beings using fictional devices come up with the physics that is really the case, it seems to me that you need to say that the objects and the people doing the science are as as as real as the science itself. And that would tend to say that the cup has a kind of reality to it. And you have a kind of reality to it, that are have to be assumed for the practice of physics itself. That's, that's what I was trying to say. Now, you might be saying, physics doesn't have an ontology for cups. I totally get that. What I'm saying is, why should physics have the monopoly on our ontology? What's the argument for that, given the epistemology and the psychology that you're advancing here, it seems to me, like our ontology is much more rich than our current physics is capable of incorporating, that's what I'm trying to get at, for example, you said you're not as stable as a cup? Well, you sort of have to be, I mean, there has to be a continuity in you, there's a right. As I move around the object, it's not just that I have to find a continuity in the object, there has to be a continuity in me as a Knower. In order for the stability of that object to be possible. I also have to have some kind of continuity. I again, I'm trying to get out. Because, sorry, we got into this, and maybe we both have taken each other too far afield. We got into this because I asked you to like what you you were dealing with, you know, the dualism problem that Descartes gaita gave us. And then you said there isn't a problem, because it's all sort of, I heard you saying sort of all constructed in the mind. But then if it's all constructed in the mind, so it's all the things and all the tools by which we did the physics, like I would be, let's use your analogy. The physics, I wouldn't trust the physics I'm doing in a dream if I knew it was a dream. And if I know it's a simulation, which you were claiming, why should I trust the physics that are occurring within that simulation? It seems to me that there is an ontology richer than physics that is needed in order to make the kind of arguments you're making.

Joscha Bach 1:19:28
So, first of all, don't worry, you don't need to apologize for taking us too far afield. I can take a speck, it's no issue. If we feel that we are going too far out here. There are two ways in which I can experience physics one is in a lucid dream. For instance, I can test whether I'm a dream or not. Usually, for instance, by operating a light switch. I found that in lucid dreams light switches, for the most part don't work. It's a funny thing, but they don't know the thing is when you read the text on a page, it's difficult to read the same text twice. You might have noticed this in dreams, right. And that seems to be a limitation of the way in which our working memory works. So I suspect that the lucid dream has to store all its state and working memory. And the causal structure that is stable in the dream has to be held there. And there is a limit to how many bits can be held in our working memory. And as a result, the complexity of the simple physics simulation and our own dream is limited. And this means that when we want to have a physics simulation that is more detailed, we probably need to have state that is stored outside of our mind. For practical reasons, it's not a philosophical argument is just practical observation. So if you want to experience a world in which light switches work, you need to store some state outside of your working memory, in some substrate that is outside of your mind. And this could be a physical room. So for practical purposes, if you ever find yourself in the situation that you need to figure out whether you are dreaming this or not, you could try to rely on processes and environment a test for the existence of process and you are reminded that you need to update a lot of state to be stable, and you check for the stability of the state. Of course, there could still be some kind of conspiracy going on. So this is not foolproof. If an evil scientist is messing with you, then the evil scientist might be able to change your memories of what just happened, and or might be interjecting weird things in there. But the question that we want to answer on the other level is, is there a conspiracy going on. And the idea that is underlying physics is not complicated assumptions about the notion of energy, time, space, and causality, and so on. These are all things that we infer at some level, they're not assumptions that we need to presuppose to make physics work. The basic assumption in physics is, maybe there is no conspiracy. Maybe this is just mechanical. And we have to understand why that is the case. And the idealist assumption is there is a conspiracy we do live in a simulation. And this idealism is not solving anything in a way that physics is not solving it, you still have to if you want to explain what's going on, make a claim that you now understand how the universe works, how that conspiracy could possibly work. And explaining the conspiracy is intrinsically harder. If you deny the possibility of any kind of physics, and physics just being the mechanical explanation.

Unknown 1:22:33
I'll come back to the point of I don't know, we infer certain things, or our inferences presuppose them, we can come back to that in a minute. But But I mean, we're in a position, at least that's what I hear you saying different from Descartes, right person being, you know, beset by the Cartesian demon. Because you, I hear you saying, I know that I'm in a simulation, which is precisely what can't happen. So I agree. I'm excluding the, the Cartesian demon for because he's you say, There's no way out of that well, right. If I doubt, my compact, doubting whether or not my doubt is like, you can just fall forever and ever I get that. I'm not saying that. What I'm saying is that you were not in that I use seem to be saying, and I think I agree with you. We're not in that position, we can we can come to see what is it about our, our consciousness and our perception, that is not real. But for me, that means that our consciousness and our perception, and our intelligence, also have access to reality, have an ability to pick up on what's real, because that would be the only thing I could use to contrast with, like my subjective experience, right? In order to say, I know that I'm inside something, I have to be able to give you good reason for believing there's something outside of me. Right? And that, that, that outside of me also has to have access. I know I'm not saying direct access, I'm not a naive empiricist it has to have access to my consciousness and my reason or my intelligence, or again, I can't actually pause it the very model that I'm using to say that everything is a projection.

Joscha Bach 1:24:21
Yeah, so if we try to understand the situation, to me, it's very, it's almost capable to to give in a similar situation as a robot living inside of some kind of computer. And this computer is set up in such a way that it provides affordances to an external environment. And now, the computational system that lives inside of that computer, this set of organized patterns, typical software is set up in such a way that it can discover regularities and the patterns and extend its affordances into this environment and thereby make sense of the environment. And it seems to me that I am. I find myself in arrangement that is indistinguishable from this description that is intimately familiar to me if I'm an AI researcher.

Unknown 1:25:13
Right, I guess the question I'm asking you, in your example, is it possible for the robot to discover that it is inside the computer?

Joscha Bach 1:25:24
Yes, I think it is. But there are certain limitations to this. And I think that you can discover this form, in the sense from first principles, because there are no alternatives. There are many ways in which you can map this conceptually. So the ways in which you depict these entities, because they are not entities that are defined by physical appearances, they're not defined by res extensa. They are defined by certain conceptual relationships. And it turns out that all the ways I think, in which the mind can exist as an apparent pattern and control structure are, can be mapped structurally, in first principles on conceptual structures that are equivalent. So we might disagree about how this computer is set up is the Von Neumann architecture or anything else, and there is no possible way to distinguish them. And there is no claim to this, how this actually works. We know that the biological systems that are able to process information, work in dramatically different ways from the technological systems that were built for, to process information, and so on. And we don't have disagreement about this. But we also know that there is a certain deep conceptual level and equivalence of what they can do.

Unknown 1:26:39
I agree with that. And so now, it's what it sounds like you're saying is the most real things are the things that are sort of accessible to my primary reason. And that's what I use in order to determine I'm within the welter of experience, and I use my app Priore ability to make sense of things. And that helps me sort through and sift through those that are going to let me know that I'm inside a simulation. And then that that says to me, that what's ultimately real for you, and you invoked architects, at one point, when you talk about the cup, you're you're sounding to me like a Platanus, you're sounding me like you're saying, what's ultimately real, are sort of the mathematical objects accessible through a priori reality. And everything else is less real than them. And it's like, I mean, Plato has the first simulation theory around, you're inside the cave, and you're only looking at the shadows, and the echoes, and you have to make your way out. Is that a fair reading,

Joscha Bach 1:27:42
almost think that an archetype is an optimum and a description function. It's, in some sense, a mathematical regularity in the same sense, as the Greek gods are archetypes, personality archetypes, they're basically if you take a space of personality properties and their interaction, right, they interact with each other, and you basically do a find settings of the dials, that give you a one personality that is as clear as possible. Given these assumptions, you end up with one of these archetypes. And so the Greek gods are stable in this way, or the Christian God is the archetype of the total god. Yeah, and it's a particular one, because this thing needed to be loaded to be also an civilizational spirit for an agricultural society. So it's not actually the total God and so sleight of hand that is going on by identifying the Creator God is the God of meaning, and is the God of the late Roman Empire. Right. So these are different gods in a certain way that have been put into one, for practical reasons. And the reason why we have so many claims to total gods, is because of this payload, that the myths of the total God has to carry. But this doesn't mean that the archetype actually exists out in the physical world, there is no reason why when you have a description function, and you discover an optimal monad, why this thing needs to exist, but it will exist in the systems that build these types of models, which means they exist as a point of reference, there are certain Optima in which you describe things. And it's also true for our own perception, when we perceive things, what we perceive is not the features in which they are arranged what we perceive as a certain ideal that is being rejected by the features. Right? And this is, this is what Platonism means it doesn't mean a claim to the actual existence of physical things of affairs in the world with which we causally interact. It's the observation that when we are building models of the world, there are certain models that are more pure and more elegant than others. Right. And this, this is, in some sense, the Platonic idea.

Unknown 1:29:50
Yeah. And so that's where you and I have a very deep kind of agreement. Because I consider myself a NEO Platanus So, in my sort of ultimate orientation, I guess what I would say, and Plato, I think might agree with me is he would say, was saying it doesn't exist physically, it doesn't say much, because the physics is ultimately less real, then the Platonic objects of which, right? Because the physical things, the instantiated things are only, as you said, only temporary instances, right? They're less stable, they're less real. And so the fact that it doesn't exist physically doesn't sound like to Plato's ears, they would go, yeah. And that's, that's to say that they're more real than a physical reality and an important way. And that seems to me kind of what you need in order to do science, you need to be able to posit these kinds of entities in order to do generalizations, in order to be audacious in some ways, the empiricist would like the fact that I could run some math and make conclusions about reality. I mean, you have to believe, strongly, you have to assert this kind of thing. And now, you seem to be nodding, so I don't think I'm being too imposing on you. And I'm finding that we got to this place. Very, very interesting, because and I don't mean this as any kind of critique of your presentation. I didn't get that when I was watching your videos. Right? It took it took it took, it took a lot of this now. And again, I'm not critiquing you. But I found that I've now gotten to very, very interesting place with you. I don't know what we haven't said too much about consciousness and meaning, like we promised we would. But I found this, this progression really, really powerful and interesting. Because I'm also interested, you have a knack for saying very intriguing things about religion in history. I'm very interested in the fact that Platonism Neo Platonism, because they were a continuity, formed an interesting kind of lingua intellectual lingua franca along the Silk Road. You can even see this historically, Neo Platonism was able to reciprocally reconstruct with Christianity, with its lamb with Judaism. And there's there's now some evidence, even with Buddhism, it seems to be have this interesting capacity to be more of a or primordial representation of our shared intelligibility making processes. I find that a very interesting proposal right now. Because if we could get the philosophical argument we've been exploring and the historical argument together, that means we could make a plausible argument for a sharable framework for interpreting reality and making making claims about reality and normative judgments. And I think this is very centrally needed for a problem I talked about extensively, which is the meaning crisis that the West is facing. So I just wanted to say, I mean, I've been sort of, like, very critical, but I want to now stand back and express appreciation for sort of where we got to and some of the possibilities I see in it. I hope that also wasn't imposing on you. But you were nodding as I was saying it. So it seemed like it was

Joscha Bach 1:33:17
like you don't need to apologize in this way, in any way. I don't identify with me having these ideas. I can observe myself having ideas, but the relationship that the ideas have, to me is not very interesting. I just tried to play the glass Punchbowl as well as I can as to as to you, right? So you never need to apologize for criticizing an idea or having a different one or pointing out where my thinking falls short. And I'm grateful if you point out things that appear to be inconsistent. Don't worry about this at all.

Unknown 1:33:48
You're playing, you're playing, you're playing the music with me very well. And I appreciate that. My point for making the apology. First of all, I'm a Canadian, we apologize for everything. Secondly, the point for me was to try and to show you from where I was coming. That I wasn't. That was the point I was trying to I was trying to make. So I'm interested. Can I ask you a question? It's slightly more personal. I think it's fair to say that the position you've taken, because I've I've interacted with a lot of cognitive scientists, who are computer scientists, the position you've taken isn't like, is it the consensus position or even the majority position? Is that fair to say?

Joscha Bach 1:34:32
Yes and no, I find that a lot of people who deeply think about these topics seem to be converging. So if I would be discussing with say people like Minsky, treasurer, many, many other people next Thursday, we'll have a discussion about attention with Michael Graziano and Vasudev and Jonathan Cohen come from AI and neuroscience. A cognitive science and philosophy. And we be discussing attention and its relationship to consciousness ultimately, yeah. And I find that there is a large convergence in these ideas, I also don't find that my ideas are in deep sense or original, it's just that the more ideas I discovered, the smaller the parties become that I am late to. You know what I mean? Right. So I don't think it's possible to have philosophical ideas about the relationship between mind and physical universe that have not been had by somebody a few 1000 years ago. And then if somebody has a fundamentally new idea, that's probably bad news, unless it relates to some kind of super modern physics and highly original way. And it's possible that we find discovered something on this level. But by and large, the big foundational questions about epistemology, and so on are apparent for so long, that I don't have any claims to originality in there. And so, I would say that my ideas are not original. And they're also relatively widespread. And the disagreements are largely happening, I think, at the when people have different epistemology, when they think that there are ways to establishing truths that are different from the ways in which I think that tools can be established, or

Unknown 1:36:22
Sure, sure, I think that's why I wanted to play at the epistemological ontological level with you. I'm interested though, that because I also have a sense of, of a growing convergence. And that's why I liked the fact that you do a big picture cognitive science, because I think you have to do big picture cognitive science to get that sense to to really get it. And I am wondering, in your practice of doing cognitive science, how do you deal because I agree with you about that convergence? And I agree with you, how do you deal with the different ontologies? Right, so the neuroscientist talks about neurons and does fMRI and the artificial intelligence person talks about programs and run simulations, and hoping that they become instantiations? The psychologist talks about working memory, and does you know, experiments on behavior, The Linguist talks about deep structures, and like collects data about judgments of grammaticality. How do you this question really concerns me, because I think it it's part of a Gantt trying to turn cognitive science back towards the existential issue that's facing us, I don't mean, existential, a sense of threat. I mean, like how Kierkegaard would use the word existential meaning making, I go back to the point I made, at the very beginning, right, that for a long time, the cognitive sciences, and I'll use that plural, as opposed to cognitive science that tries to do a synoptic integration, the cognitive scientists could have cognitive sciences have promoted a fragmentation of what mind means, in a profound way. And that fragmentation has really, when people start to reflect, and they can often I see this in my students, right, they'll they'll get caught up on, I don't know what this I don't know what a mind is, because there's this there's this cacophony of all. And then of course, if I don't know what a mind is, I don't know what I am. And I don't know how I relate to the world, you can see where this goes, the fragmentation of the ontology, by the cognitive scientists, is not separate from a lot of the, the the suffering that people have, because they don't find a stable framework in which to locate the phenomena of mind. So I'm asking this, because as I said, I, and you invoked wisdom A while back, and so I wanted to circle back to that. What wisdom have you acquired, cultivated, realized, I don't know what verb you want, for helping do this, get to things, getting the various disciplines to start to pursue integration, rather than fragmentation. And connecting that to sort of the general issue of how we as embodied minded beings fit into a scientific worldview? I know that's a big question, but I'm really interested in it.

Joscha Bach 1:39:46
I think that the disciplines by and large are not very well incentivized to to science or philosophy. Yeah. So that's something that we need to understand that there are institutions in which people go to work to feed their children and and a scientist is in some sense to me, someone who has a particular kind of personality. It's someone who very early on in the psychological development has decided to trust their analytical thinking more than their intuitions than their feelings, and their emotions and so on. And typically, this happens because they had Asperger's and the priors that they had when they interacted with other people socially failed in school. And so at some point, they realized I cannot trust my feelings, because if I go by my intuition, my interactions with the world are going to fail and to have to move to the analytical mode to make sense of the world. And if you are permanently in the analytical mode, that's a trauma mode, right. And healthy human beings should understand that purpose of analytical reasoning, which by itself is very brittle, is to go do you have as your darkest emotions, those very, you don't see clearly what's what, in which way to go. So analytical reasoning is a very powerful tool. For very narrow areas of understanding the world, we just happen to be the ones that should be studied in the sciences. But it's wrong to present scientists as a lifestyle archetype. And as the goal of education. Only a very small subset of people should be scientists, and the existence of scientist is very useful to the world. But being a scientist is largely not fun. And so we have see science currently as more like an employment program where we put people that are difficult to employ in the industry, because we don't need that many people in the industry and teach them methods. And then they apply these methods. And we hope that the results cumulate. And the outcome is largely not that interesting, because you're not being hired into a science to answer foundational questions, there's very few ways to answer foundational questions, because the low hanging fruits fruits have been wrapped long ago. And so you don't actually need that many people working in their foundational disciplines and making foundational progress. And you're not incentivized to have ideas about foundational things. So among the very few people that are willing to offer answer to foundational questions, and are so bold and crazy to do this, there seem to be in some sense, three groups. One of these groups is people that don't fully understand the depths of these questions and think that they found a very simple answer that solves the problem without actually doing so these people tend not to be very interesting. So there are simplified notions of consciousness, they do not explain the necessary and sufficient conditions for a system being conscious. And they might lead to models in neuroscience or in AI, or in robotics that claim to do a certain thing, but they don't. And it's not that interesting that these exists, then there is another type of mind that is very humble. And these people say, I don't actually know what the answer is. And I have the following questions. And I'm aware of the following space of attempts to answer this, and I am currently moving in this area of the space. This is what I'm seeing from there, I'm currently standing. And this is how I'm able to interact with others from this vantage point. And I'm still in this exploration. And so it's a very tentative position, and so on. And it's one that's also not being openly discussed very much, because a scientist has to publish the things that they can hope to prove, and not the things that are seeing and most of the things that we're seeing as a possibility. And most of the interesting answers on the realm of the possible cannot be established by an experiment, because it's a possibility. Right? So the possibility is often the most interesting things and possibilities are difficult to publish, and discuss about exactly well said. And the third group are the crazies is that people that think that they have certainty, and they're super smart, and they go very deep. And often the crazies are also among the most interesting ones. But it also means that you have to parse them in the right way. Yeah. So the crazies are, for instance, your Schmidhuber, or Stephen, Wolfram, and so on. These are people that, for some reason, aspire to greatness, and force themselves to be great, no matter the personal cost to them. So they're not humble. And they do have theories of everything that they are not shy to denote as such, and put out there. And these ideas are often extremely interesting to bounce up against and try to understand them deeply.

Unknown 1:44:16
That's very interesting. Much in that was well said, I've been trying to talk about and model a form of interaction, called the logos in which people are in the second group, but are willing to talk about sort of ideas and proposals that come from the third group that where people are very open to, as you said, a kind of humble exploration. An idea that you can help me correct and I can help you self correct and we can work together and we can get we can get to ideas that emerge between us that I can't get to on my own. You can't get to on your own and that openness to the possibility of you Anyone emergence bumps us up against when you call them the crazies. Because you one of the things you want to do is let some of those crazier ideas in because they help give you it's like letting in a different sensei into the dojo for a bit not for not for very long because the dojo will fall apart, but letting them in for a bit because you get a new, you get a new conceptual vocabulary and new theoretical grammar. And so I've been I've been trying to model that process even more and then academic setting, I've been trying to pursue the presentation of ideas of consciousness, the self, etc, in a dialogical manner, rather than in a monologue in which there's all kinds of claims about closure and certainty. So, I think I agree with you, I think that this is ultimately, or at least not ultimately, deeply an institutional issue. And institutions only change when there are alternative examples of attractive forms, new forms of practice. And so I've been trying to bring this new form of practice into the forefront as a way of trying to address a lot of the concerns you just brought up. So I think that spending time doing more of this, he's actually not, it's not an ornament. It's not just a ceremony. It's not just a social gathering for cognitive science, it's actually essential for cognitive science. If it's going to progress, I guess this is me also saying thank you to Kurt for doing this. And thank you. Also, for you, your show, you came here in good faith, and you've been that way throughout. But I'm trying to make an argument for this being more central. And the problem is that the institution, that is where we housed the science, the the university, doesn't know how to deal with this emerging phenomenon, it doesn't know how to deal with because of social media because of this technology. Because a lot of this understanding this is all happening more and more and more. But when I, for example, when I try to bring this in to the institution, the institution seems to still be bound in sort of a Victorian paper and pencil mentality about how we evaluate things, how we evaluate the work people are doing, like for example, none of this, even though I think it's really important to the to the life of cognitive science, none of this would even show up on my CV, because if I put it on my CV, it would just be ignored. And it seems to me that's a very problematic place that we have gotten. We've gotten to

Unknown 1:47:47
John would be an example of you bringing this idea of dialogue to the university and the university saying no, like, what specifically did you propose?

Unknown 1:47:54
For example, I you know, I put out I put out a series, the elusive I with Greg Enriquez and Christopher mastery piatto. On the nature and function of the self, we did the untangling the world not with Greg Enrica psychologists about consciousness. And it was done like we did one with Zack Stein and Greg and Rica's on towards a meta psychology that is true to transformation. And to my mind, the kind of exploration of ideas and advancement of insightful arguments was better there. And I'm not trying to be self congratulatory, because other people are doing this. But it was better than a lot of the stuff that is typically sight, like you typically put on your CV to count as, right, okay, you're doing work in the discipline? You know, you know, you know, that's, that's what I'm trying to say. The discipline is no longer the place where the science is getting most Sorry, I was exactly the wrong word, the institution, the University is no longer the, and I like working for the University of Toronto, by the way, I'm not trying to get myself out of a job. But right, the the, like, the institution is not the place really, where the kind of science we need now, both for itself, and both for the culture is happening. That's the argument I'm making.

Joscha Bach 1:49:15
Usually, there's no other place, right? It's not like that there is a new heaven that has opened itself up for experiments and thoughts like this. There is a network of basically small events of workshops, conferences, and so on, that happens between the disciplines. But it's mostly that we do this on the side. Yes, exactly. In addition to what we do in the sciences in the same way as Michael Graziano, or Tononi, and many others basically have a daytime job and the sciences and the philosophical contributions that they do they do on the site. It's also in many ways, too for us. And it's not that we feel that I feel that I mistreated in this way understand why the institutional incentives are in the way they are in the way have reasonable and good natured reasons for this for the most part for why this is the way in which it is, it just means that we need alternate ways of funding to make this happen. And we need alternate ways of organizing it to keep on this going at going on with it. I also want to just briefly make a case for the crazies. The reason why I'm not a crazy is because I'm not smart enough, I'm not smart enough to maintain the illusion that I see things that others are not seeing, and often more clearly and better and with more focus than I can see them. So I basically, I get humbled by my own inadequacy. And there are some people, which obviously did not that inadequate, so for them, it takes many decades longer before they would get to the point where they are forced to humble themselves. So they can maintain an illusion of greatness that they might have developed on the dollar sense as a protective measure for their own psychology, and keep up with being great. And if somebody who's really, really smart is able to keep up the crazy greatness, this notion of everybody else is confused, and basically the only one who sees the solution. And here it is, basically, this is an extremely valuable person to have around and Jays should be cherished and protected. And doesn't mean that you have to believe everything that they say. But there are very few people which are so bold and so daring that their sacrifice themselves in such a way,

Unknown 1:51:29
you're sure do you see that as a negative? Because the way that I hear it, it sounds like you know, when you're in a job interview, and they say so what are your weaknesses? You say I work too hard. But what are your weaknesses? Well, I'm not beset by the illusions of the crazies.

Joscha Bach 1:51:44
I wouldn't necessarily present this as a weakness, the typical answer in this job interview would be I'm too honest. Right? And then the other one says, Why is that a problem? Don't give a fuck what you think. Now, the problem is when you are in a job interview, and you don't fit in the issue is what is the thing that you actually want to do? Do you want to be part of that particular hierarchy of this particular kind of organization of this particular kind of normativity? And do you think that you can actually help it along? Do you share the aesthetics of that place of work that you will be part of, and I found when I was in academia, I really enjoyed it, I really enjoyed working with students, I found that I needed to defend a space of inquiry, and the space of inquiry coexisted with the application of methods. It was the thing that enabled me to say to a student that was not inspired, you shouldn't be here in my class. If you don't like this, if you don't intrinsically want to do this, you're wasting your own time and attention, and my time and attention and determined attention of everybody who's there, go have a relationship, go read a good book, go sit down in a cafe or watch a movie or go to another class. Don't be here. Because what we try to do is we try to abuse the machine of academia to do the things that we actually want to do, which is try to figure out our relationship to the world and make actual intellectual and philosophical and personal progress on certain questions that actually move us and motivate us to be here and spend a portion of our precious, irretrievable lifetime, visit each other on these problems. And so I don't found it difficult to defend. But I also understand that the machines that we are part of that we are serving are largely serving other goals.

Unknown 1:53:33
That was very well said, I guess for me, I want to, I guess I see more urgency now than there has been in the past. I agree with you about these institutions are set up the way they are, for good reasons, etc. But I do think we are we're entering into very, very significant changes. You and I both think that, you know, strong AI is something that's very possible. I know you said because you've said this, and you and I both think this has, you know, just important ramifications beyond what a lot of people are thinking about. And that's just one example of the way in which this is accelerating, and, and, and is corrosive to people's attempt to sift through and make sense sift through the bullshit and make sense of their world. The work I did on the meaning crisis, the sense of of bullshit. It's accelerating, it's accelerating exponentially. People are increasingly thinking there's more and more more and more bullshit and more and more bullshit around. And I think the kind of stuff we're doing here together is the place the arena, the dojo, in which we both train, how to wrestle with that, and exemplify how to wrestle with that. And so I think there's an urgency. Now to get, I think COVID accelerated in certain ways to give more prominence to this dial up this kind of dialogical space in practice.

Unknown 1:55:14
So I guess for me, I want to push, I want to push for more of this.

Unknown 1:55:22
Because the rates of suffering, both in the sense of distress and loss of agency, seem to be going up by several sort of objective March of markers. And so I'm concerned that I don't think I don't think the academic world quite academic world is turning to this problem. And I think this is a better forum in which we can start to explore what we need to do in order to address that problem. So for me that urgency is part of what I was trying to put my finger on when I said, we need to be doing more of this, this is valuable, this is central, this shouldn't be on the sidelines, it should be in the center. And there's difficult tasks, there's very practical tasks of how do we make this more attractive to a wider audience of people? And how do we make it attractive? So we can draw some of the first kind of people in? And how do we make it attractive so that we don't automatically exclude the crazies? I agree with that. I mean, but you don't want you don't want, you don't want just suck, you don't want a room filled with just Socrates, a bunch of Socrates. He was a tough boss. He didn't fit in, they killed him. And so I think these for me, these questions are, are becoming increasingly central, about how do we make this what we're doing here, into an attractive way of life? For people?

Unknown 1:56:59
What do you mean by way of life?

Unknown 1:57:01
So what I mean by this is that, and I think you said it. For me, exploring these ideas is not something I do to get sort of an intellectual orgasm. And oh, that was cool. Right? Ultimately, I want to be able to explore these ideas in a way that can ameliorate people's sense of being disconnected from themselves from the world, from each other. And so, if I get a deeper understanding of the mind, and consciousness, and meaning, I want to I want that to ultimately be in service of helping people to whether to read they feel comfortable with and capable of making use of these ideas, in translating them into practices, things that they do to individually and collectively to make better sense. Like, let's use a let's use a model. A historical, right, Christianity, and I'm not a I'm not a Christian, I'm not proselytizing, for it, was able to create this structure that went from like Aquinas to somebody's grandmother. And got you get them to interact together, coordinate together, work together, have a shared sense of connectedness, meaning that's the kind of thing I think we need. I'm not proposing a religion here. I have sometimes say, I'm proposing a religion, that's not a religion. That's what I'm talking about. I'm talking about that these in the end. Sorry, this sounds harsh. But in the end, I don't really care deeply about what you believe. I care about what you practice. I care about how are you transforming yourself? And how are you affording other people to transform themselves in a way that makes lives less beset by foolishness, more enhanced by wisdom, and flourishing for individuals? So that's what I that's what I ultimately care about. Did that answer your question?

Unknown 1:59:07
Yeah. What would happen if that goal of helping people contradicted the goal of let's say, investigating reality, whatever that means? So for example, let's say you found out some truth via some scientific investigation that would destabilize people that would make them feel worse, that would disconnect us. So then what do you do you make the decision to not publish that to not investigate that further?

Unknown 1:59:34
I, I guess my response to that is, I have a certain kind of confidence in the truth, the interconnection between things being true, and then ultimately being good. In fact, we have to view truth as a kind of good in order to explain what we're doing. As scientists. There's something about you know, knowledge exceeding Experience Machine right? Let me give you an example from I do this in my classroom, I ask people, How many of you are in satisfying romantic relationships, romantic relationships are really important in our culture, because they sort of take the role of religion. Right? Because you ask people, What do you need to be happy, romantic relationship? And what causes the most suffering romantic relationships? So Right? And I ask how many of you are in satisfying romantic relationships? And then, you know, I get a certain percentage I said, of these people, how many of you would want to know that your partner was cheating on you, even if that meant the destruction of the relationship 95% of the people keep their hand up. There's there's, there's there's a, there's a valuing a meaning of being connected to what's real. That seems to be this is one of Plato's arguments, that seems to be kind of a meta desire. In addition to whatever we desire, we have a meta desire that what satisfies that desire is real, in some fashion, which is why I was pressing on realness so much with your show. So but what I want to say is, there's a presumption to your question that, right, there isn't an intrinsic value or goodness to discovering what's real? And I think there is, and then what can people transform themselves? Because so they come into greater conformity to that? Yeah, that's what I think it means to cultivate wisdom. And so I sort of put my trust, not in the particular metaphysics of the wisdom traditions, but the fact that we've had wisdom traditions, and we have reliably found people to become people to be capable of becoming wiser, and certainly individuals to be wiser than others. So when I'm saying it, I put faith in those two things together. That's what I'm saying.

Unknown 2:01:58
You're sure I was gonna ask if you have any comments on that?

Joscha Bach 2:02:01
Yeah, we found that we don't admit don't have differences, at least not in the discussion that we had, in the last couple of hours, we mostly had very similar approaches and ideas, and he developed our terms together in ways that was very harmonic, we might have a difference in the reason why we do things. It seems to me that John has a different relationship to normativity than me, and maybe we can go into this question later. But basically, from my perspective, looks like John sees himself as a spiritual teacher. And I don't have enough maturity, to see myself as a spiritual teacher of his integrity, I also don't know what I would get out of this. My own observation of the meaning crisis is that it's inevitable because the civilization that we are part of doesn't have much of a future. And there is no way in which the civilization can be fixed without changing some of its core assumptions. And so we sense this, and we, it's reflected in the fact that our civilization is not projecting itself into the future. We have no models that we discuss, with our children in school or in our institutions, we have no plans that go beyond the next few decades. It's not that we actually think about what will life on Earth look like for our civilization in 500 years from now. And that's new. This was not true in the Christian society, for instance, they had an idea of what was going to happen in a few 100 years from then. And this idea might have been wrong, but they made plans for it. And some of these plans came to pass. And we don't have that kind of planning horizon anymore. So we basically are now in an organism as a hyper organism that is past its prime, that is, in some sense, visibly in its autumn, and it is facing off against all sorts of existential risks. And we feel helpless dealing with these risks. And as a result, we don't have a shared purpose, we might have a shared purpose as an individual, as a family, with children, as friends. But we don't seem to project this shared purpose anymore. at a societal level, there are only small groups within societies, some evangelical cults and transhumanist cults and so on. They try to maintain the fiction of a future that they're acting with, but not at the level of the entire civilization. It is the level of this individual group and our mainstream webcast. DHS this mostly by despair or denial, yes. And we're even an outright nihilism. And I don't have an argument against that nihilism, because I think that from the perspective of the civilization have made this is justified. And if we want to build something new, we have to do this from the vantage point of the next civilization and that's almost impossible to maintain the space in your own mind what the next civilization would be looking like and how to build it. So the only thing that I have to offer in terms of spiritual guidance is that I have my friends. And it's not that much more. And so it's what when we knew the possibility that I could offer somebody that I say, this is how you fix your life. This is how you fix your relationship to the world. This is how you fix your relationship to society. And this is how you fix your society itself, because they don't have these kinds of answers. I don't know what these answers would look like, I'm willing to look for them, I'm willing to look for them because others, but I'm not convinced that there is an answer. And instead, there is more a place that we can get to. And this place comes from attempt to develop integrity, and to be truthful. And I agree with John that truth is crucial, because truth is instrumental to good regulation. It's even reflected in cybernetics in the court regulator theory, you cannot regulate reality, imagine you're not truthful about it. So the attempt to bend your worldview to make it more desirable to deny the things that don't fit into the world that you prefer, as to just one and so on, is not going to lead to a better world, it's going to lead to a world that is worse. And so you need when you want to model the world to this in a space that is independent of what you want to be true. So there needs to be two parts of us one that is modeling the world, this detachment.

Joscha Bach 2:06:31
It's not important, who is looking at the world and why. And another one that you make your personal bets and where you construct your aesthetics, based on what you think is true. And this separation is something that is not a consensus in disciplines that think about what the world should be looking like. So for instance, there are very few sociologists that look at the world with detachment. They largely do this from a very local perspective that is congruent with what their friends think. And that is basically characterized by the present ideology. And I don't think that you can be ideological and truthful at the same time, radiology commits you to seeing the Certain Way, the things that are happening in the world, regardless of the facts that you're observing. And it makes you inclined to pick certain facts over others to support this particular kind of aesthetic. And for me, the aesthetic is something that needs to be developed independently of the reasoning about what is the case and density. Most people that think normatively prefer to be part of the hive mind before they are truthful, autonomously? I have difficulty with the general notion of normativity. My own thinking is, when I do philosophy, primarily not normative. I'm thinking about everything that could be the case, I'm not thinking about what should be the case, every suit is an if then.

Unknown 2:07:58
There's a lot I have an agreement with about what you said there about the meaning crisis? I guess, part of what I don't know of my spiritual teacher or not, but But nevertheless, perhaps what I would say is, I think you are proposing a lot of what goes into the notion of wisdom, a concern for the truth or ability to detach from an egocentric perspective, pursuing integrity, etc. And I think it's one of the things we should do is consider increasing the wisdom of people. I think that's a viable project. And in conjunction with that, I I think we should do what, what has typically happened when civilizations have collapsed, the Bronze Age collapse, or perhaps the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, right, you had you had the building of new communities, and communities of communities that made possible new ways of life for people. And we're able to take salvage with the the previous civilization had done and exact it into the next civilization. A prototypical example of this as be somebody like Agustin the barbarians are literally at the gate. And he is shepherding sort of the Greco Roman heritage into Christianity, and he's modifying it. He's coming up with a new way of being, he's the autobiographical self comes into kind of awareness. You know, there's a new way of being a person new way of being a community new way of being in relationship to the world. I'm not saying he did this single handedly, I'm just using it as a case and he helps to build the possibilities of the next civilization. Now, I'm not arrogant, I hope I'm not so arrogant to think. And I know I'm Augustine and I know what it is, it's going to be turned up, I think we should be getting a lot of people trying to build, right these models these ways. Because typically, if you have that kind of a translation process already in place, you get to the next civilization with much less suffering. I'm not convinced that we can like you that we can save this, what we have. But I guess I want to find out what is the best way individually and collectively, of collecting the candles from what we have made, so that we can carry them into and make it possible for our children. And so this is, for me a way of trying to get back to the generational relationship, like you were talking about, where it's not just me here now in distraction or despair, but trying to ask, like, and I don't mean this technologically or sociologically, or politically, trying to ask, look for where are people trying to build what looks like viable possible new ways for being in a civilization. And we know that this has been done in the past. And this isn't an algorithm it can't be. But we can look at those historical figures, we can look at many of those historical examples, and try and glean sort of the best lessons possible. That's what I'm proposing, I'm definitely not founding a religion, or anything like that I, I'm not the right person for the job. I didn't want the job. And so if that's if that means I see myself as a spiritual practitioner, so be it. I'm fine with that. But I just wanted to clarify what I'm proposing, I'm proposing something that is possible, at least we have, I think, relevantly similar cases from history of where this has worked. And you can see it, like I say, to I've looked at carefully at the axial revolution, and also the end of the Western Roman Empire. That's what I'm proposing. That's what I'm proposing.

Unknown 2:12:17
I have a question for both of you. We'll start with the OSHA, you mentioned that you have this relationship with your ideas, which is that you don't devote yourself to them. They're not they're tentative. And I'm curious, in the past two years, what's an idea that you used to believe most that you no longer believe? And then what led you to that decision? That's for both of you. But we'll start with the OSHA

Unknown 2:12:37
that he has to go first.

Unknown 2:12:42
So let's say in the most recent past two years.

Joscha Bach 2:12:49
It usually doesn't feel like a big revolution, it's more of a gradual progression, or sometimes it new VISTA opens up. And there are a few thoughts that now are interesting to me. That is, for instance, how can the system discover itself and the world that I see more central than before, there are few notions that I take to be possible that I didn't explore before. So something that I'm exploring right now is, for instance, the idea of memory not store being stored in synaptic weights only, but being stored in it is Soma of neurons in the form of RNA. And this leads to a radical change in the way in which I think about the formation of memory and the execution of functions in the brain. And it's not normative in the sense that now now, I believe that we should be two things doing differently, but it it changes the way in which I think about neural computation and leads me to envisioning new experiments that need to be done to figure out whether this is the case. And this is an example of where my perspective has shifted, or another one is the role of consciousness. So for instance, I used to think that consciousness might be an side effect of the way in which cognition works in human brains. And that other systems that process information in the service of agency are not necessarily conscious. And a while still consider that to be possible. I think it's also conceivable that consciousness at some shape, or form is crucial to make sense of the world. Basically, perception is following gradients and it's converging to a certain state. And if you're just following a gradient, you don't even need to have memory of where you're coming from. But certain kinds of reality interpretation require construction and construction cannot follow a gradient construction needs to make experiments and remember which experiments worked and why and then we call this and use the knowledge of that. So it needs to make index memories of the operations that it performed. And it also requires some kind of central organization to construct, you need to develop a central plan and then act on that central plan. So you have some kind of top down localized imposition of low dimensional function on the entirety of perception. And it could be that this coincides to the law judge degree with the functionality of attentional consciousness. And basically consciousness in the role of a government. And the government is an agent that is imposing an offset on the payout metrics of individual participants in the system to make the Nash equilibrium compatible is the common good. So it's basically overcoming local incentives in the system, to follow a larger plan. So it's this government itself is not creating the incentives, the incentives are created by Game Theory, physics and an underlying dynamics of the system that is facilitating, for instance, a society or that is facilitating the function of a brain, you will still have to look for foot in social interaction in all these things. Consciousness is channeling the motivation that we have, it's not creating it, it's a creating a model of where we are, this is what we experienced as reality and experience a model of what we should be doing to our purposes. But the motive power in these purposes comes from our underlying motivation, that is outside of consciousness that is older than consciousness itself. On the other hand, we can see that basically all the mammals are conscious. And there's also something that I was not that acutely aware of before I started looking. But it seems to be that apparent in the interaction between animals and also the animals and humans, that there is a mutual awareness of the awareness of the other. So these are things that my thinking has changed in the last few years. And part gradually, in part more radically, the most radical one is RNA based memory transfer, the possibility of that and the implications for that, which is just a very recent idea that I have, I don't know how long I'll hold on to this, and what will come of this. But it's something that doesn't change my normative thinking in a fundamental way, and often is these small changes to details of your technical worldview, that can have a big change in your trajectory.

Unknown 2:17:20
John, it was very cool. The consciousness of the government. I like that idea, it resonates with some of the stuff I've been thinking about. So maybe you could talk about that at some point in the future. So for me, I like your show. I mean, I often I'm aware of these things only retrospectively, not prospectively, or introspectively. So I guess, retrospectively, I'm noticing that I'm really, I'm focusing on this issue that we've bumped up against a couple times, which is normativity. And for a longest long time, I was very much like sort of like the Prophet Habermas talks about, I saw these domains, the true the good and beautiful as separate from each other and, and autonomous. And, and then there was a hard fact value distinction, things like that. And I'm now I'm now really, I really seriously questioning that, I'm seeing more and more good arguments for the interpenetration of facts and value. And more and more arguments for the interpenetration mutual affordance of truth, goodness, and beauty. And that is, that's opening up other issues about the interconnection, of effect, and cognition. And that, unlike yoga that leads into more sort of technical things, I think there's ways of integrating processes of relevance realization, with predictive processing models. And I just reviewed a paper for frontiers. I hope it gets published, I recommended to get published, where people are exploring this convergence now, in a really powerful way. One of my former students, Mark Miller does excellent work around this. And so considering a lot of this stuff, much more deeply. So there's the downstream stuff about ways in which particular theories could be integrated together. And the upstream stuff is maybe the the enlightenment, I mean, like the European enlightenment as a period of time, the Enlightenment idea of the autonomy of the normativity is is something we should go back to questioning a lot of the machinery behind for example, the is odd distinction, the fact value distinction has actually been undermined by a lot of arguments. Case Spear has made a good case of that and others. So I'm not I'm not sure I am on that. I'm reading some very good books by D Schindler about that, but I I'm really trying to get clear about the relationship between the true the good and the beautiful to give the classical name on it. And then what that means about well, being wise how we best live our lives, because talking about how we best live our lives is a normative judgment. And how do all those three, if they aren't, I mean, part of the meaning crisis is also the fragmentation of these normativity ease, and we put them into weird competitions with each other, that was part of Habermas his argument. And if it's possible that we are moving beyond that model of the modularity of the normativity, but rather than I'm not saying their identity, by the way, but their interpenetration and mutual affordance into affordance, that I think has important implications for how people go about judging what it is to lead the best kind of life. So that's where my thinking I wasn't in that position. I wasn't tackling those issues. I wasn't reflecting on them. I wasn't reading about them three or four years ago. So that's a significant change. For me, I had, I had a whole set of presuppositions and don't make this heroic, I didn't sort of like, oh, by the, by reading people like that. Those presuppositions have been slowly archaeologically excavated. And I've come to be questioning them in a way that I had not foreseen. And, and then I'm also currently finding currently fruitful and valuable.

Unknown 2:21:38
Okay, so this question comes from Donald Hoffman. He wants to know, is spacetime an aspect of fundamental reality? And also, can there be a theory of everything so you can tackle whichever one you want? And we'll start as usual with yoga?

Joscha Bach 2:21:56
No, it's not. The obvious giveaway is that the collapse of the wave form marks a point in your past, beyond which you cannot obtain a model of events happening in time and space in a pinpointed fashion. That is one of the answers. Another one is that the traditional notion of time and space requires a temporal and spatial continuum. And the temporal and spatial continuum would require that you have basically infinite granularity of things that are happening, which, if you turn this into a constructive language means that you would have to process infinite amount of information in a finite number of steps. And this leads and contradictions in the definition of language, which means we cannot properly define these terms without running into contradictions. It's also not necessary to do this. So we can create constructs that allow us to model the function of the universe to very low level without going to continuity. So I don't think that spacetime itself exists. But it is an apparent thing that happens at a certain level of coarse graining, that there are properties of spacetime, this, which means the regularity and flatness and so on, that are probably required for having us in it. So basically, for an evolution, you need to have a region of, of the universe where you can apply the things that you learn in one corner, in another corner. And your control actually works over time spreads and over space. So you there is a reason why the universe around us looks as if it was happening in nearly continuous space, and visiting nearly continuous time. John?

Unknown 2:23:48
So I guess, Donald's question. I guess I would want to talk to him about a fundamental ontology. Do I think that time and space are the ultimate? Our ultimate reality? No, I don't think so. I think I heard he was just saying something similar to that. That doesn't, by the way, mean that I think they're in illusion. And I don't take your show was saying that either. I think we have to be very careful about when we're talking about these kinds of levels. Because our it's not the case. And this is going to go towards my answer the second that it's not the case that we can find all the explanations we want at any particular level. And there's lots of arguments for this, but I don't think there's one level from which all the explanations can be generated. And so in that sense, if what you mean by a theory of everything is a theory in which all explanations are reduced to I don't know, quantum mechanic explanations, and even if those are explanations, it's questionable. I don't see that as a viable project. So do I think time and space are ultimate reality? No, I don't think that means they're an illusion. And I think we should talk about there being something like a QA A levels of reality. I think that things not only emerge out of the quantum base, they're also constrained by, you know, law like features of reality, which aren't properly talked about as being in time and space. So like, I don't know what it would mean to say, like that two plus two equals four, that temporal spatial, that makes no sense. Even something like equals MC squared, it doesn't make sense to talk about it being here or there or starting then or there. And, of course, there's lots of other entities like this. So we have emergence up out of something like she was talking about a non temporal spatial probability realm. And we also have higher order constraints that also don't seem to be spatial, temporal. And I think I think of time and space as caught between that emergence and their emanation, I think part of what we're doing, when we're playing with quantum mechanics and relativity, relativistic stuff and trying to reconcile them not, there's not a perfect mapping, but we're trying to get clear about how those levels are appropriately real together. And so that would be my answer to both questions. I don't think they're ultimately real. I don't think that says they're an illusion. And I don't think there is a theory of everything, because I don't think if by theory of everything, you mean, I'm going to pick one level. And that's the level at which I will be able to explain everything. I mean, you'll show for example, and he's perfectly legitimate for him doing this is not a criticism, he picks a computational level, right and, right, and that's the level from which he works. But that doesn't mean that like, like he thinks he, I don't think he should respond to this criticism, which I take to be a pseudo criticism, all but the computation was ultimately just right thermodynamic or something like that. And

Joscha Bach 2:27:31
I know thermodynamics is a way to talk about computation, it's the other way around. So in some sense, they, you know, has a class page B, or maybe it's a famous book that he has written in which he describes somewhat metaphorically a world in which people do science and philosophy by playing a certain game with glass beads. Yes, game, it's never completely explained how it works, right? Yeah. So you are free to project whatever you want. And this, so you can imagine it to something like an extremely complicated abacus, in which you are shifting these glass beads around according to very intricate rules. And it allows you to reason about the world in some kind of automatic fashion. And you're playing it against each other, but you are playing it according to rules. And the individual that is playing it is not crucial for this game at all. It's the rules of the game itself. And so I think what happened was computation is that we discovered a glass punch view. And we discovered the equivalents of all glass punch fields that can possibly be constructed. And whenever we found something new to express ideas, we also discovered for this new thing to express ideas, that it can be mapped to a glass punch beer. And now there is this big question. Can there be a glass filled view of everything? Which means could the universe exist with an EClass? Punch spear? And from various standards seems to be that the answer is yes. But I don't know this. So I can I cannot know this before. I haven't succeeded in doing so. But in some sense, that's the game that I'm playing here.

Unknown 2:29:12
It's good book. I love him. And so I recommend the book. Yeah, I guess I tend to, I tend to be a little bit more pragmatic in the philosophical sense about scientific explanations. Methods are always bound to my interests, my concerns, the concerns of my group. And again, you've said things that are not inconsistent with that. So well, I don't know if there's anything more to say. I mean, that could launch us into another long discussion, perhaps. But I think I've tried to answer the question. I don't think they're ultimately real. I think they are intermediate literally real. Right, in some ways. As I tried to say, that doesn't mean they're an illusion. And I, I am suspicious of grand reductive explanations, maybe more suspicious than usual. Because I've watched them fail in the history of science in the history of philosophy. I think more. And it's unclear whether or not what you're just proposing does a reduction or does what I'm not going to talk about. What I see now is kind of reciprocal, reciprocal reconstruction. Between these various levels of discourse. I see the AI people changing the minds of the neuroscientists and vice versa, and the AI people changing the minds of the psychologists and vice versa. It's not that anyone, anybody, one person claims to have this. And I don't know if the glass bead game would be a game of reduction to itself, or a game in which we can really facilitate the most optimal kind of reciprocal reconstruction between our various ontologies and strategies of measuring and explaining the world. So that's how I would answer that

Unknown 2:31:06
sadface has a question, can we get a discussion on their perspectives of on the Chinese Room thought experiment?

Unknown 2:31:14
So should I go first this time, because, please. So the Chinese, first of all, I don't think it's an argument. I think it's a demonstration of arguments already that are already prefigured in Descartes. But nevertheless, I think Searle deserves credit. I think he's right about sort of the standard system and room reply. Sorry, this sort of system and robot reply. That's what I meant to say. I don't think he has an answer to the virtual machine reply. Because he didn't foresee it. But I think he would respond to the virtual machine reply by invoking his argument about multiple realizability. And that multiple realizability indicates that an entity and AIS presupposes multiple realizability. Ai is not in any AI is not intrinsic does not intrinsically exist. It's only attributed because of multiple realizability. I think the response to that is, I don't think the distinction between attributed and intrinsic is as clean as he makes it, for example, is the distinction itself intrinsic or attributed. That's a very deep problem. And secondly, we do think that there are things that are multiple realizable that nevertheless intrinsically exist, combustion, erosion, evolution are clear examples. So I don't think his intuitive criteria for splitting intrinsic and attributed is sufficient. I think we have to look at other accounts of how we think things have a kind of independent existence from us. And so the degree to which things are, we think things are self organizing, in some fashion, guarantees that a kind of autonomous existence, that CIRTL needs to acknowledge, and because he because he invokes biology and other things, I think he is ultimately committed to what I just said. So I think the Chinese room argument doesn't settle anything in and of itself, I think you get shifted to the virtual machine reply, the virtual machine reply would get addressed by Searles arguments about multiple realizability and things being intrinsic or attributed. And I think that's where the crux of the argument is. And I think we don't always think that things that are multiple realizable are necessarily attributed, and I gave you some instances. And I think that's where the argument bottoms out. And that's would be my reply to the Chinese argument. It seems to me that there are things that are multiple realizable, but we nevertheless take to be intrinsic, that they exist intrinsically, not just by our attribute money only exists by attribution. We all agree it exists and exists. And if we stop agreeing, it doesn't exist. I don't think combustion erosion or revolution, which are relatively realizable, exist in that way. And so I think his clean dichotomy breaks down. And so that would be my my answer. I think it's important work. I teach this by teach Searle I teach the Chinese room argument, but I teach this whole series of arguments, and it gets down to some very fundamental issues, that Searle surdos argument and his intuitions about how you distinguish the intrinsic from the attributed. That's not well argued that and he does and he doesn't, for example, deal with the cases I just proposed to you. Things that are clearly multiple realizable and intrinsically exist. So his idea that if it's multiple realizable, it must be attributed seems to be falsifiable. And I think that there, that's where the argument ends up.

Joscha Bach 2:35:07
notion. The multiple realizability is a stand in for something deeper, it has to do with the fact that causal structure can be insulated from the substrate. And to insulate causes to occur from the substrate means that you will now have a causal description that happens independently of the underlying physics, for instance, the stock market could work in different universes. The stock market in some sense is an independent causes traction, as soon as you have Turing machines that can be built in many kinds of universes, you can build causal structure on top of these Turing machines that is arbitrary, right? You could build a computer game and other universes, as long as you can build a computer and these other universes, and this computer game can have arbitrary physics like computer game can have. And in a sense, I think that money would also exist if you stopped believing in it, as long as we have functional mechanisms that implemented response to money. So as long as you have banks implemented in software, and ATMs and stock markets, and Amazon is accepting money, and so on, and so on. Right, the money would retain its functional character, independent of the beliefs of people. And so we have updated in the sense because we no longer just see money as an agreement between people. But this agreement between people has been extended into machinery that we have built in the world that works independently of the beliefs that people have. And this leads us to the question of what is software? And software is not a thing, right? Software is something else in which sense the software exists. And the best answer that I have so far discovered is that software is a physical law. The physical law says, if you will, for instance, arrange matter in this particular way, the following thing will happen. And this is true for software, right? So no matter where you are in the universe, in which universe you are, if you produce the following functional arrangement of things, the following thing will happen. This is what software is about. So the programmer, in some sense, is discovering by constructing certain very peculiar circumstances, a very specific physical law. And

Unknown 2:37:20
I just want to draw up, that's really cool. That's really cool. I really liked that idea. So I want to make sure I'm sorry, for eternity, I want to make sure to follow you, you're proposing that software has the same kind of ontological status as physical law. Exactly. Wow. That's really, really cool. I hadn't. That's cool. Keep going, please. Just wanted to say that's very cool.

Joscha Bach 2:37:39
Yeah. I thought when I stumbled on this insight, that it was good insight that basically started to make sense, right? Because it's an apparent pattern in the interaction of many parts.

Unknown 2:37:50
Yeah. That's very good. I like that. That's very good. That's very good.

Joscha Bach 2:37:55
So this also means because I think that mental states are best understood. So first states that the ontological status of our mental states is different from the ontological states of the one that we attribute to physical things. So it has to do with 20. The notion of identity of a mental state, that is similar to the identity of a physical law, which means it's not this point by his identity. Yeah, it's a functional identity. Yeah. And now let's go back to the original Chinese room argument is very simplistic in the sense like, it's a children's story most that child himself doesn't believe. And it's an argument that is by observe when he repeats it today, made in bed face, as well as affiliated visitors, as actual contributions to philosophy have been largely an extension of auto Austin speech act theory, they are boring and wouldn't give rise to fame. But the Chinese home is somebody that everybody understands, because it interfaces for certain intuitions, and it's an intuition pump. And if you disassemble these intuitions and try to make them more distinct and more clear, then many of them fall apart. And Searle is aware, because he's not stupid. He's a very smart individual, of many of the ways in which they fall apart. But he is still repeating the original Chinese room argument because it's his brand. So it's not because he believes in it. And if you actually read his work, he is aware of many of the counter arguments, and he knows that he needs to go into a few levels of complications, to have an interesting argument to have an interesting case that he's making. So the superficial level of the Chinese room argument is maybe not that interesting. A slight extension that is more interesting is the Chinese brain argument that's well, it's also aware of, and the Chinese brain argument suggests that instead of having this library verse books in it, in which you will execute the algorithm, we use a different implementation of that whole thing. And instead, what we do is we take

Joscha Bach 2:39:59
and begin decision of the neuron itself. So if we accept that what the brain is doing is facilitated by the interaction of neurons. There, you won't have to follow certain rules in order to make that happen. And maybe we can spell out these rules and our thought experiment, and then we assign a Chinese person to a neuron, and beat maybe we need a few more, because maybe we need 86 billion Chinese people, instead of 1.4. But it's a thought experiment, so not a problem at all. And now, instead of neurons, we have Chinese which follow these words, or we could use machines instead of the Chinese that are following these rules. And so I think that this matching between a neuron and a Chinese person is not completely absurd on the face of it, of course, it would be much larger and people are wired up. And now serve would say, of course, the Chinese brain doesn't have the necessary and sufficient conditions to produce a conscious mind. And then access to meaning so doesn't change anything. But that the Chinese room or the Chinese brain is performing these operations, the Chinese brain is still not able to speak Chinese, because the individual identities of the Chinese people and their knowledge does not interfere in any way was there emulation of the functionality of individual neurons. So now, if we have established this case, by so would say, the Chinese brain is not conscious, but your brain is conscious, let's see, where is the boundary between those two systems. So let's take your brain blow it up until the person and the neuron have roughly the same size, to change the time. So it doesn't matter how much the Chinese need to talk to each other to make the neural functionality happening, and send messages back and forth. So let's keep this an identity. And now we take basically take your neurons and cell accepts that neurons are facilitating mental activity is not mysterious, or suddenly he doesn't know how the brain does it. But he agrees that the brain is doing it is a physicalist in a sense. So now, let's replace step by step the neurons by some other machinery, for instance, Chinese people or machines that have neural network functionality. And so at some point says that loses the ability to be conscious. So the consciousness is dragged drowning out of this system, by this replacement process. And what this means is that Searle has a strong anti functionalist position, he basically says that the function of the individual parts is not producing the essential behavior, they assemble, in essence, he's an essentialist. And I don't know how to get essentialism to work, because nobody has ever seen an essence, right? We can talk about an essence, but it's AP phenomena. And the problem was AP fundamentalism is, is the following episode. The reason is, if we go back to our dualism from the beginning of our conversation today, it's the idea that there is maybe redexes, from the mind, where the mind is reading physics, but no right access from the mind into physics, so it's not violating the causal closure of physics. But there is a problem with EPIPHENOMENALISM. And that is the fundamental experience that you don't think you can explain. And the physical mechanism is not driving anything of what you're saying, including your utterances of beliefs. So when an epiphenomena says, but I feel and this cannot be explained by physics, this is caused by physics, right? Because the analyst has to move their mouse or move their fingers to express the statement. And all these movements are caused by an entirely mechanical process, the true feeling which happens next to the physical mechanical part of their mind, the philosophical zombie, and so on, it's not driving any behavior. So basically, there would be this locked in AP feudalism that would helplessly watching their body make statements in favor or against EPIPHENOMENALISM. But there would be no causal relationship between the EPIPHENOMENALISM. So no epiphany list is an epiphany timeless because they have phenomenal experience that cannot be explained by physics. That is the issue here. And so if silver goes down that past, he goes down to a very inconvenient place that I don't know how to resolve.

Unknown 2:44:07
Okay, John, I know that you have to get going. So how about I read the last question, if it would take too long for you to reply, then send me an email and then I'll read it when I'm re editing this podcast. Sure. Okay. So the last question comes from Sam theists, he says, or she says these models of consciousness seem to focus on explaining the production of intelligence or a simulation. But it isn't necessarily clear to me why a simulation should be able to perceive slash experience itself. If we think of meta consciousness as a combination of intelligence and consciousness. The model seems to focus mainly on the rise of intelligence in meta consciousness. How do you explain the ability to perceive slash experience the simulation?

Joscha Bach 2:44:50
time you start?

Unknown 2:44:54
So it's interesting, very

Joscha Bach 2:44:56
short, easy questions, wrap it up for today with the simpler question. Since

Unknown 2:45:01
I mean that, it's important to ask that question, but it's important to not ask that question the wrong way. You can always ask what it is like. And the thing and this is like Moore's thing about the good. I can ask that for any proposal. You can even ask that. Well, you know, what it's like is to have qualia, well, what's it like to have qualia? Do I have quality of my quality, like you have to you like, this is the difficulty, you have to come to a place where you're saying that's what it is like to be what it is like. And we didn't get into it too much. But like I said, at the very beginning, that primary sense of relevance, and I think is a big piece of what its likeness. It's what's why things stand out in our salient in our background, it, it's why things are aspects analyzed for us to use one of Searles notions. And many people are converging on the idea that the function of consciousness is this kind of higher order relevance realization. And that's why it overlaps with working memory and attentional machinery. So what it's like, if that's right, if what it's like is this ability to do salience landscaping, to have this dynamic textured of how things are relevant to you. If that's a big part of what it's like, and I think it is, by the way, because all of those in the pure consciousness event, all of those other things that are so beloved, all the magic, title quality and all the other things they go away and consciousness doesn't. So those things can't be necessary conditions for consciousness. If that's part a significant part of what it's like, then being intelligent, is also that being intelligent is this capacity to zero in on relevant information, exclude irrelevant information. That's why you get high correlations between measures of general intelligence and measures of working memory. But of course, there's deep interest, there's deep anatomical relations between the machinery of working memory and attention, and fluid intelligence and consciousness. So I think the question is now being to a place where I want to say, no, no, no. And by the way, they can notice how you run on that. You genuinely Eugen, you generally attribute consciousness, where you where you attribute high orders of intelligence, of intelligence, you track them together, like Russia, I don't? Well, I go further, I don't even eat mammals. Because of that conclusion about mammals likewise. Well, there you go. And so for me, right. There has to be a level at which you accept an identity statement. Because like I said, you can always play the game no matter what I that is what if I say x is what it is like, you can then then you can just do it. But what is it like to write x, you have to come to a place where you accept the AI identity claim. And I'm proposing to you that if you look into the guts of intelligence, at least general intelligence, fluid intelligence, and then you look into the guts of consciousness, and where do we need consciousness, we seem to need consciousness for situations that are novel, for that are complex that are ill defined, and situations that don't have those demands, we can we can make automatic unconscious. That's a good point made by born sir. I don't say to the questions about intelligence and consciousness are ultimately separable questions. And I think there's good reasons for that. I've just given you some, and therefore, I think at some level, and maybe your show will like this. When it says system is sufficiently intelligent, it's going to be conscious. That's what I would argue, for the reasons I've just given and asking me, but what is it like to be intelligent? Or what's it like to be like, notice, you don't ask the question about what is it like to be conscious in the sense of what's behind it? Right? You have to come to a level at which you say, No, that's what that's this. This is what it is liking? Is this is the function it's performing. This is the kind of process it is.

Unknown 2:49:29
If not, if you don't put some bound on where that identity is possible, then you just get an infinite regret aggressive this question, because no matter what, I pause it for you, you can step back and say, but what is it like to x? And then I'll say, Well, what's it like to x is two y and they'll say, but what is it like to y? This is like the the four year old ask you why all the time, right? You have to come to a place. And what I can't give you is I can't give you a phenomenological experience of that. Because you're trying to ask how phenomenological experience is itself possible, what I can give you are these plausible arguments about overlapping functionality, etc. That's how I would answer that question.

Joscha Bach 2:50:10
Okay, let me try. So, there is an issue. For instance, freewill. freewill is an intermediate representation, I think, free will is what decision making under uncertainty looks like from your own perspective between discovering the first person perspective and deconstructing it again. And once you have distracted, deconstructed your first person perspective, you basically realize that there is a particular procedure that you are following when you are making your decisions. And when you observe yourself following that procedure, you will not have an experience of freewill, it just we rarely get to the point in our short lives where we fully deconstruct this. And I just give this example to argue for the possibility and I'm not sure there's no certainty there, that consciousness might be an intermediate representation. It's basically a simplification of the state of affairs in which we are in before we automate all the necessary behaviors that an intelligent system might want to exhibit in, when it's being confronted with the world in which we are in. The reason why we experienced things is not because physical assistants would be capable of doing so it's quite the opposite. Neurons cannot experience what it would be like to be a person that is confronted with a complex world. And that changes its attitudes in response to what's happening to it in this complex world. But for the organization of the neurons, that is controlling the behavior of the organism, it would be very useful to have this knowledge of what it would be like to be a person that is changing its attitudes and response to what's happening to it. So what the neurons are doing is they implement a model of what that would be like a simulation of what that would be like, in the same way as the neurons create a simulation of a Euclidean universe with objects that bump into each other and have causal interaction in neurons create the model of agents that try to care about future states and how they play out and make decisions about this. And one of these agents is going to be a model of the organism itself, and the behavior that motivates the organism. And the reason why we experience things is not because we are in the brain, it's because we are in that model, we are in that simulation, we are in that dream that is woven by the brain to explain its own behavior. We experience things for the same reason that the character in a novel experiences things. It's because it's written in the story. And the story that we experience, of course, is not a linear narrative made up of words. It's a more complicated world. It's a causal structure that contains the necessary properties to simulate physics and personality and agency and so on. And we find ourselves in that dream. So our experience of the world is virtual, the it's a result of the capacity of neurons to dream, and to create dreams.

Unknown 2:53:05
There was a question that came from Enel Seth, professor, and it'll set and there's a podcast of Anil Seth on this channel if you'd like to check it out on consciousness. Professor O'Neill Seth asks, Yoshida Do you believe consciousness to be substrate independent, ie, a silicon computer, in principle could be conscious. And if so, why? Yoshio responded to me via email and said, there is no known reason why the process playing out in the brain cannot be functionally replicated on a silicon based computer. I think that consciousness is not so much a side effect of how a biological brain makes sense of the world, but of the need to create a coherent representation out of dynamic perceptual features. Because of this, I think it's likely that intelligent autonomous sensemaking agents with similar complexity as ours, may be considered conscious in ways that are comparable to ours, even if they run on a silicon substrate. There's an important caveat. Our computers provide some functionality, which is hard to achieve in the brain. They're almost fully deterministic. They're synchronized in ways that allow each part to rely on the functionality of all others at any given time. And they can make information available very quickly throughout the entire processing architecture, crucial parts of the phenomenology of human consciousness, especially reflexive consciousness may be the result of self organizing processes that our brains cannot do without, but that may not be necessary in our digital computers. Thank you both for coming. The audience thinks you, there were I think 500 People at its peak, and right now it's around 430 or so. So hovered from 400 to 500. Thank you all. Thank you, Yoshua. Thank you, John.

Joscha Bach 2:54:43
Thank you. Good. Thank you for setting this up. It was a very pleasant conversation. I was surprised if you don't seem to have that many disagreements.

Unknown 2:54:53
Well, maybe maybe it's the level we were talking about. I sort of wanted to talk at a very fundamental ontological level. I And I wanted to understand you much more than just sort of simply debate you.

Joscha Bach 2:55:07
Likewise. And I think that we have a both bound by the same rules of the glass pet interview in a way.

Unknown 2:55:13
Yes, yes, yes. Very good. So, thank you very much. It's a great pleasure meeting you, Shawn. I enjoyed this conversation. Amanda, question. Thank you very much.

Unknown 2:55:25
Take care of both of you. And you're sure you'll send me your audio. Great. Okay.

Joscha Bach 2:55:31
Well communicate over email. All right. Have a good afternoon, everyone. Thank you have a good rest of the day, wherever you are.

Unknown 2:55:38
Thank you, everyone. Thank you for your time and attention.

Unknown 2:55:42
Okay, everyone, I will be sticking around and I'll answer some audience questions, but I gotta get going for about one minute.

Unknown 2:55:54
Okay, so phrase 14 phrasal 14 wants to know what I consider Thomas Metzinger on the program. I don't know who that is. So I will look into that. I'll make a note. Yes, I should let you know that there's a sponsor of today's episode. And it's a new one. It's a small podcast by the name of the Anna doggy podcast. I'll type it here. And it's run by someone named Thiago who reached out to me and it touches on similar themes. So if you look at so that person is who's responsible for bringing this talk together. Thank you, Thiago. Okay, I guess I should get going. If there are any quick questions for me, then I'll answer right now. If not, then I will say goodbye to you all and get something to eat. Okay, so is there any chance of having Nima Our Connie Hamid on the channel? I've reached out to NEMA several times. Turns out that my brother went to university with him studying physics at the same time. So I'll see if I can use that connection though. They parted ways after graduate school. Lisa Feldman Barrett. Yes, she's on the list. Now I need to look into her work. At Vin wants to know if I expect it to have more disagreements, I thought I was surprised to what your show said where he said, Well, we agree more than we disagree. I thought it was mainly filled with disagreements, or more about clarifications than disagreements, which can be their own disagreement. Julio wants to know what I get a traditional Advaita monk? The answer is yes. And if you take a look at this video that I have about the 2022 plans, you'll see that I do have a great interest in speaking with people from the more Eastern ends of the philosophical spectrum. So yes, the answer is yes. And that'll be toward the latter half of the year. Now, the reason for why it's so far away is because my background is in math and physics. So let's say I'm supposed to, let's say, I'm going to be interviewing someone for their theory of everything, like let's say Garrett Lisi, it'll be much easier for me to understand his theory than it would be for me to understand someone who isn't Advaita monk, it would take much more time, because I like to implement some meditative strategies. That is, I'd like to meditate some meditation practice in order to experientially understand what they're saying. And it's not. It's not trivial to me, and I don't take it lightly art and you want to know is Bach, a materialist, duelist, or idealist? He says he's not an idealist. He comes close, which is interests like a physicalist idealist. And he's not. I don't know if he's a materialist, I think he would, it would be closer to materialism. One of my goals with this steel location was going to be that. And luckily, I didn't have to interject much, I thought that what was going to happen was they were going to be difficult to follow, because much of what they say. And this is evidenced in the comment section of any of their videos, people can't follow people have a difficult time understanding because it's so steeped in cognitive scientific jargon, terminology that's unfamiliar to most. And then on top of that, with Yoshi, Bach, there's computer science analogies. And then on top of that, there's your showbox idiolect, like his personal language, where the analogies between computer science and reality are made in a manner that is unique to him. And he's so familiar with his own model that I don't think him nor nor John, for Vicki are aware when they're speaking above or below someone. And I was thinking that I would have to step in and slow down and break down sentences. However, that didn't need to happen at all. Okay, well, thank you, everyone. Thank you, and have a great rest of your day. The podcast is now finished. If you'd like to support conversations like this, then do consider going to patreon.com/cu RTJIMUNGAL that is Kurt Jai mungall its support from the patrons and from the sponsors that allow me to do this full time. Every dollar helps tremendously. Thank you.
