Unknown 0:00
This is an episode that's been almost one year in the making the Thiel location of Donald Hoffman and Yoshi Bach, both of whom should be extremely familiar to you. If you've surveyed this channel before, as we've done an unduly technical dive into Donald Hoffman's research papers, and we've spoken to Yoshi Bach several times before as well. If you're unfamiliar, Donald Hoffman is a professor at the University of Irvine, California, studying consciousness and evolutionary psychology using mathematical models and Yoshio Bach is a cognitive scientist recognized in the field of AI as being exceptionally ingenious. Both have unexampled views of consciousness and freewill which harmonize and contradict in prepossessing and informative ways. Click on the timestamp in the description if you'd like to skip this intro. My name is Kurt Jai Mongol. I'm a Torontonian filmmaker with a background in mathematical physics dedicated to the explication of the varigated terrain of theories of everything from a theoretical physics perspective, but as well as analyzing consciousness and seeing its potential connection to fundamental reality. Whatever that is. Essentially, this channel is dedicated to exploring the unrivaled nature of reality, the constitutional laws that govern it, provided those laws exist at all and are even knowable to us. If you enjoy witnessing and engaging with others on the topics of psychology, consciousness, physics, etc. The channels themes, then do consider going to the discord and the subreddit, which are linked in the description. There's also a link to the Patreon that is patreon.com/kurt J Mongol if you'd like to support this podcast, as the patrons and the sponsors are the only reasons that I'm able to have podcasts of this quality and this depth given that I can do this now full time thanks to both the patrons and the sponsors support. Speaking of sponsors, there are two the first sponsor is brilliant. During the winter break, I decided to brush up on some of the fundamentals of physics, particularly with regard to information theory. As I'd like to interview Tiara Mr. Leto on constructor theory, which is heavily based in information theory. Now information theory is predicated on entropy at least there's a fundamental formula for entropy. So I ended up taking the brilliant course I challenged myself to do one lesson per day, and I took the courses random variable distributions and knowledge slash uncertainty. What I loved is that despite knowing the formula for entropy, which is essentially hammered into as an undergraduate, it seems like it comes down from the sky arbitrarily. And with brilliance for the first time, I was able to see how the formula for entropy what you're seeing right now is actually extremely natural. And it'd be strange to define it in any other manner. There are plenty of courses and you can even learn group theory, which is what's being referenced when you hear that the standard model is predicated on u one, cross su two cross su three, those are li groups continuously groups visit brilliant.org/tau T OE to get 20% off an annual subscription. And I recommend that you don't stop before for lessons, I think you'll be greatly surprised that the ease at which you can now comprehend subjects you previously had a difficult time grokking the second sponsor is algo. Now algo is an end to end supply chain optimization software company with software that helps business users optimize sales and operations planning to avoid stock outs, reduce return and inventory write downs while reducing inventory investment. It's a supply chain AI that drives smart ROI headed by Amjad Hussain, who has been a huge supporter of this podcast since near its inception. In fact, um, John has his own podcast on AI and consciousness and business growth. And if you'd like to support the tau podcast, then visit the link in the description to see on John's podcast because subscribing to him, or at least visiting supports the tau podcast indirectly. Thank you and enjoy. Okay, this should be live. If you can see this type in Animaniacs into the chat Animaniacs. Great. There are already 275 people watching. Firstly, it's a distinct honor to be here. Thank you both Don and Yoshi. I appreciate it tremendously. The audience does as well. This theory is of everything. project is about exploring grand unified theories and theoretical physics, as you know, and understanding consciousness and freewill. I see those or at least intuit that those are integrally tied. And it's those the latter two topics that bring us here, Don, why don't we start with your definition of freewill as well as how you view consciousness. And you mentioned that you would like to give an overview of your point of view on science and theories of everything in general. And then you OSHA, you'll join afterward commend Donald or amend him, and then I'll pretty much shut my mouth and allow you both to speak to one another. interjecting only seldom.

Unknown 4:33
Okay, thank you, Kurt. Good to see ya. My attitude about science is sort of like what Newton famously said. Right, he said, for the end of his career that he thought of himself as like a little boy playing on the seashore looking at some nice pebbles and shells while all before him. Lay the, the vast ocean of truth that was undiscovered. And, and I, you know, I think that that's a good attitude for us as scientists to have is that as much as we've done, we've really not even begun to explore the possibilities of truth. And what's interesting is that Newton's followers, famously didn't follow him on that, in the late 19th century, a lot of Newtonians thought that it was pretty much over, they had a theory of everything. There were a few little wrinkles, you know, there was the problem of Michelson Morley experiment and, and blackbody radiation wasn't quite working out, According to Newton, but they thought that that was pretty minor stuff. And they would figure that all out, and physics was pretty much done. And we've discovered that no physics would was hardly beginning, because there was so much more to discover. And so my attitude is that science cannot have a theory of everything, in principle, that we will always be on Newton's seashore will always be like Newton, the little boy playing with pebbles and, and shells, while the vast truth lays undiscovered before us the ocean of truth, and is for a principle reason, that scientific theories, if you look at how they're structured, we start with a good scientific theory tells you exactly what its assumptions are. This is what I'm assuming. These are the derivation rules that I allow. And then everything about the theory follows from that. But that that theory doesn't explain its assumptions. The assumptions are what's assumed. So Einstein, in his special theory of relativity, assumes you know, that light travels at the same speed for for all observers in all inertial reference frames. But that theory doesn't tell you what light is. And in fact, Einstein spent his whole life wondering what light is, and toward the end of his life said, I've spent my whole life studying it, and I still have no idea what what light really is. And so we're in that situation, as scientists where what we're doing is valuable, it's absolutely essential, because we're being precise about our assumptions, or being precise about what they entail. But there's going to be a fundamental limit. And my guess is that science as valuable as it is, is one of the most important advances that humanity has made, will always have only scratched the surface beyond the seashore with with Newton, while the vast ocean lays undiscovered. And so that sort of went so when we talk about theories of consciousness and freewill, and, and so forth going forward. I do it with sort of a very modest look at at my own ideas, the the ideas are going to be very much in the framework of these are the best ideas we've come up with so far, of course, there's going to be much, much deeper work ahead, and much more to discover ahead. So we just have to, as scientists be precise about the current assumptions we're making, and why we're making them and what what follows from them, but be completely open to radical transformations in knowledge and radical new understandings,

Unknown 8:33
your view on consciousness and freewill.

Unknown 8:36
So, in a nutshell, my views on consciousness are, are not physicalist. So So physicalist approaches will say that we will start with spacetime. And some of his contents, particles, neurons, neural systems, neural networks, and those will be so that's a scientific theory in which those are our assumptions space time and its contents are fundamental. And particular contents may be very, very important, for example, dynamical systems of on neural networks, for example. And from that, we're going to try to boot up subjective experience. And that's perfectly fine project to try to do, what we you know, what I would want from that physicalist approach would be nothing hand wave, but but a specific accomplishment. So, how do we start with dynamical systems of neural networks and come up with the taste of chocolate or the smell of garlic or something specific, some specific conscious experience where we say, my my scientific theory says why this dynamical system of activity in neurons or in computer Nervous System or something like that must be the taste of chocolate, it could not be the smell of garlic. And these are the principal reasons why, if we, if something like that were on the table, I would be impressed. Until then I'm not impressed. So, so there's nothing on the table yet that can do that. So that's one reason why I've been casting around and, and looking for a different direction. Not starting with the, with the physical, but starting somewhere else. And partly because and we can talk about this in greater detail. Because our best scientific theories right now, namely quantum field theory and general relativity on the one hand, and evolution by natural selection on the other, both entail that space time is not fundamental. Our two or three premier scientific theories really tell us their limits, they tell us that spacetime cannot be fundamental. And that therefore the contents of space time are not fundamental. And so if we're going to look for a theory of consciousness, and we start with something inside spacetime, we're already starting where our best scientific theories tell us is not fundamental. So, as a result, I've been trying to then say, well, if spacetime isn't fundamental, and we don't yet know, what's more fundamental, why don't we first start with trying to get a mathematical theory of consciousness on his own terms? What is consciousness? What kinds of assumptions can we make about it? And then we can ask the question, is consciousness more fundamental than spacetime? What is the relationship between consciousness and space time? So, so that I can go in some of the details if we want to on that model. But But the big picture is that

Unknown 12:06
I'm taking very seriously that evolution of natural selection entails that none of our sensory systems tell us the truth about objective reality. And that therefore spacetime is is not an objective truth is just a representation of fitness payoffs. And that physicists are finding the same thing that Nima or Connie Ahmed, for example, Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton basically, has lectures where he says space time is doomed. And here's why. And the best physicists are now trying to figure out what's next. Space Time has had a good run for several centuries, and it's over. space, time is not fundamental. And the contents of space time are not fundamental. And so we need to figure out and he's got things you're working with one Malda seen on things like cosmological polytopes, they're finding structures beyond space time, from which spacetime can emerge as as a as a projection, as a special case. But these in these in these deeper theories, there is no time. And there is no space. But there are symmetries that are true of, for example, scattering amplitudes data, that that are there that are true that you can't see in space time, they can predict the data, but they don't use space and time as the fundamental concepts. And I think that as we start to go into your scientific theories of consciousness, we cannot ignore what our physicist colleagues are telling us. They're telling us if you're looking for something fundamental, it's not space time, and in particular, is not time. And that that is a real showstopper, is for the physicist to I mean, trying to think outside of the time box is not easy for the physicists. And so what do we do if we don't have space time if we don't have time? So So I think that that's one of the interesting questions that we have to face. If we're going to come up with a theory of consciousness. What do we take is fundamental in our theory, if we take anything inside spacetime, we're already sort of cutting ourselves off, because we know that as physics progresses, things inside spacetime will just be shown to be secondary. So we can go into more details on my current model of consciousness, but maybe we should talk first about the more meta ideas.

Unknown 14:28
Sure, and Yasha please

Joscha Bach 14:33
It's interesting that you start outing yourself as a mysterious in a way right Mysterion ism being the position that human minds are basically not equipped to understand how they work or how the universe works, that they're embedded in at a very deep level. And sometimes joke that Mysterion ism is the position that something cannot be understood if it cannot be understood by Noam Chomsky. Noam Chomsky is the newest Mysterion is with respect To the mind, at the science of consciousness conference, he once gave a presentation where he talks about the cart and then mentioned that the guy was actually a very smart fellow, because you could already anticipate stuff that would only be discovered much, much later on, and I was perking up and wondering why God Chomsky is giving this guy credit. And it turned out what he anticipated was that we would later like tomsky discover that the mind is unintelligible. Right? So this is fascinating, of course, if you are one of the smartest minds of your own generation, and you'll see that other people don't understand things and that you understand. And there is a boundary where nobody seems to have an understanding, and you'll crash against it use, you might think, okay, maybe there is no way that humans can do it. I'm not convinced that this is the case, though I'm not I'm not a materialist at this point, in my intellectual career, and that's part because I come from the other side. So many of the things that people took as a given for a long time, like space and time, appear to meet in the beginning, quite mysterious. So basically, the dissolution of space and time was not that mysterious to me. Basically, I'm a computer scientist, I started very, very early on my life to program before I properly understood mathematics. And before I understood physics, and I understood how to make things in a computer, and Einstein's watch, that is ticking away, and you can observe its movements and so on, but you cannot open it, and you can come up with theories what's happening inside. To me, this watch was the screen of a computer. And I understood that there is no limit to what can be put into the computer if it has enough resources, right. So if the computer is fast enough and has enough memory, there is no pattern that cannot be shown on the screen, there is no limit to the sequence of patterns that is to be shown on the screen. So any observation that I am making, if I understand it, as a pattern on some kind of screen that is visible to me, I will always be able to construct something, a mechanism that is on the other side and produces the sequence. And now the question is, can I produce an elegant sequence? Can I produce a minimal pattern? Can I produce something for which I think it's plausible that it emerged by itself.

Joscha Bach 17:29
And that is, to me this big, important question of physics. The idea of physicalism, to me is the notion that we live in a reality that is fully emerged over the course of the closed mechanical layer, and VR and that base reality that emerges from it. And the alternatives to physicalism is that this base layer is somewhere else. Because even if we live in a simulation that is created by some kind of supernatural being, something must have created the supernatural being and its parent universe, right. So ultimately, every supernatural event is going to have some kind of natural cause some kind of prime mover that is taking away in the void and producing the patterns that we observe and the patterns that we observe are so damn regular. And there is all this conservation going on of information, that it doesn't seem like a conspiracy. To me, it seems that we're not in a simulation, it seems that the idea that consciousness could be primary to our reality is not true. Because consciousness being primary means that you would have to live in somebody else's mind that you live in some kind of conservational simulation that somebody has set up for us. And whether it is possible, I can principle not excluded, because there can be no evidence that can ever be fully conclusive. If somebody sets it up to deceive me, there is no reason for me to believe it because there are not enough things happening in my reality that counteract the notion that I live in the mechanical universe. The few things that pop up, I can still explain this by faulty memories and psychosis. Right. So the only thing that needs to be explained that was puzzling people like touring and other thinkers is there is a possibility that telepathy is true. If that would be true, right? We would not be compatible with the way in which we understand physics right now. And there's this question, is there a point at which we have to discard physics fully and accept that you live in some kind of simulation in some kind of dream universe that somebody has set up, like a computer game where you can arbitrarily break causality when it's convenient? Or is this something that we need to extend physics? Or is it just something where our minds are playing tricks with us? If you know our minds are playing lots of tricks with us? So during consider the possibility that telepathy exists is very real to this to the point where he included this in 1950, paper, Computing Machinery and Intelligence so he sketches out the Turing test, and seriously asked what a Turing test would have to involve such a system the ability to be tested. Asik? And if it's not, what difference would it make, doesn't get to the point where he was assessed out loud that if telepathy is possible, you cannot be sure which of your thoughts and feelings originate in your own brain, they could come from somewhere else, right. So this opens up the door to lots and lots of things. But for the time being, I think that the evidence for telepathy is weak. And if telepathy would exist, would be seriously willing to consider this together. This theory is not clear by evidence, we cannot find a mechanical explanation for it. But there is always going to be some kind of computer program that explains the patterns on the screen. Now, if we think about space, to me, as a kid that was programming, the notion of a continuous space never made sense. Because it's not computable, I cannot write something that is continuous space. And when I tried to wrap my mind around the mathematics, the language broke, I was not able to understand how to make a point that is infinitely small, yet fits together. If you add infinitely many of these points into a continuum.

Joscha Bach 21:09
This just doesn't work, right. But it's not a problem. To make something that exactly looks like this, it's not a problem to make a computer game that looks continuous. It's not a computer game that produces physics that looks similar to what we can observe at least the simplification. Of course, our computers are extremely inefficient when it comes to simulating the substrate layer, the quantum mechanics that you can observe or a layer below the quantum mechanics if because quantum mechanics is probably not the lowest layer in which physics plays out, it just the lowest layer in which we can currently make observations that we can conceptualize. And this leads us to what you also mentioned, what is the photon I don't think that Einstein started out with the assumption that the speed of light is fixed. I think it was a devaluation that he made, he concluded that the speed of light is fixed. And he basically, once he had this conclusion, he had implications for the possible descriptions of spacetime that emerged. Because when the speed of light is fixed, you end up with some very interesting paradoxes. If you stay in a Newtonian universe, right? You have this issue, imagine you fly in a very fast spaceship, and you are lighting, putting light out of your flashlight inside of your spaceship, wouldn't rely on the speed of light necessarily add up to the speed of the spaceship to an external observer, right? So wouldn't this an external observer not need to observe a different speed of light than the person traveling in a spaceship. And if the speed of light is constant, always, it means that the thing that now has to change is time or space or both. Right, you can still fix this, if you make sure that the speed of time runs a different way. And this leads us to the insight that the time and space that we observe from our own perspective, as an emergent observer in whatever universe produces us are independent, they're not independent of each other, the speed of light depends on the trajectory that you know, the speed of time depends on the trajectory that you are taking through the universe. And if you want to think about something that could be more fundamental, we would say that the photon is a carrier of, of the electromagnetic force, it's a type of boson, which means it can be described as a certain pattern that has an integer spin. And it has the property that it is describing the potential reality for measuring some electromagnetic interaction. So if you take spacetime from the perspective of the observer, it's the set of locations that can contain information and the set of trajectories that the information can take. And the photon is a model of information traveling through space time.

Joscha Bach 23:55
And what we have discovered, and what Einstein also sometimes suspected, is that space itself cannot be fundamental. And there were concrete reasons to to see this because what was discovered during Einstein's career even and he was aware of this discovery, was that there were singularities in space time, which means points where the mathematics of continuous space breaks down. So your mathematics doesn't work anymore, you have some kind of division by zero, something unpleasant happens where your mathematics is no longer valid. And what Einstein saw is that we can fix this by shifting the singularities around in our space time model. And we can basically put them below the carpet, you can put them in centers of mass. So in the center of mass there is basically something like little black hole of mathematics doesn't work anymore. The mathematics of space time, or your mathematical description of that world doesn't work anymore. And what could be more fundamental than space time? I think it could be transitions. So you describe The universe has some kind of state vector set of information and this information is dynamic, you will have the way in which information moves between the locations. And in this paradigm, the speed of light could be the rate at which information propagates between locations. And this would be an upper limit of all interactions that you observe this in this lattice verse stuff is densely connected. What would it what would be necessary to if you will have a set of locations some kind of graph and causal graph and information flowing between them? To understand that causal structure? Well, you need to understand where the information comes from, to understand what it signifies. So you can model it, how can a single bit mean anything to you if it's just a single bit if it's not attached with the source with the type with the context, right, so what could be a way to figure out where information comes from that you'd need to have some kind of momentum, some kind of direction, carry information about direction, and you send this to the graph, that by itself, this is just locations connections, the only way that you can do this is if this thing is extended, if it's not just a single location for which the information propagates. But if it's neighboring connections, and you'll get information that verifies it, so you need to have be in some kind of density, strong letters for information that you can pinpoint. Basically, you need to have something that looks like a continuous space. So you can identify controllable structure that you can identify where stuff comes from like a photon. And if there is information that is traveling across distance, so to speak, that is non local, that is not going to densely connected local connections, but that is going over individual long range links, this information will look like a random fluctuation, or a distant entanglement, that you can no longer track if you don't know where it originated. And this will look like something like in determinism and from your local observer perspective, still, you would not be in contradiction to the preservation of information, it would still be a universe in which information is not invented, but in which the amount of discernible information is constant. And if the universe was not in such a way that information would be preserved, of course, it would not be learnable it because it would mean that the present state of the universe is forgetting what happened before in the universe, it gets disconnected the world, the end of the universe just gets disconnected. And so from an epistemological perspective, we can only learn the aspects of the universe that look like they are conserved. If there are things in university that are not conserved, then they will not be intelligible to us. And of course, it's conceivable that universe is some kind of automaton that forgets information. Another thing that shows us that spacetime cannot be fundamental, besides about theory in which destroys the notion of locality, is the notion of the collapse of the wavefunction. Basically, this collapse of the wavefunction is the point in the history of an observer beyond which we cannot obtain a model of locations of events in time and space. Right. Beyond that point, it's no longer enough just that we don't have enough information to construct it. But it makes no sense anymore to assume that the photon was at a particular point when it went with the double slit height at this point, this face time model breaks down the space time model is a mathematical abstraction, that works relatively well to look at things happening in the limit. But it's not a model that can be fundamental, I think, and, but I'm not a physicist, so I'm not actually qualified to have these opinions. This is just what it looks like to me, as a computer scientist, who tries to understand the mind and things like Donald, that we have to understand a certain degree of physics, to make sure that our theories of consciousness are tight, and that they make sense, and to be able to understand in which way they could possibly relate to physics. And let's convince that Donald that a deep understanding of physics is necessary or that physics is going to teach us about consciousness, in part because I don't think that consciousness is that mysterious anymore. Spent a lot of time in my life, thinking that it was mysterious, but seems to be a riddle that can be solved. And basically, I think that there's some aspects to consciousness for instance, that you that you're observing yourself to be observing. But consciousness is something that is entirely virtual, it's not a physical thing.

Joscha Bach 29:39
electrons, photons, physical entities, neurons, brains cannot be conscious. They're just making mechanisms. And the body can see is that the elements of our consciousness are not mechanical. They're magical. Somehow there is magic happening. If there's magic happening, it means that it's an a causal structure. It's something that has been made on some kind of course, room. But that is not necessarily built in the same mechanical way as physics is built. It's a story, it's a, it's a tale being told by a physical system to itself. And if you think about organisms, you often think of them as physical systems. And then these are right, the organism doesn't exist, it's not the thing. If you think about it, what exists are cells that interact with each other. And even the cells don't really exist, what exists are molecules. And even the molecules don't really exist, right. They're all layers of descriptions, they're models that you can make, because they are coherent. And they hold to some degree, it might be freezing out at the boundaries. But there are ways of thinking about the flow of information in the universe. And the organism is a coherent pattern that you observe, and the interaction between cells. And the cells have been set up by evolution to interact in this coherent pattern, because when they interact is if they were driven by a single spirit by a single target by a single tell us if their behavior is coherent and consistent, that a State Building, then they have an advantage over sales, which don't do that and justify it for themselves. Because together, they can play longer games. By playing longer games, they can occupy a niche in nature that cannot be occupied by control systems that play shorter games. And this is the benefit that organisms have these coordinations between cells. And an organism is a function that describes this pattern in the cells. And the organism is facilitated by information processing across sets, among other things. To coordinate its interactions, the organism needs to have something like a telegraph network, by which it's able to make models of reality and coordinate them between the cells and coordinate the behavior of the cells. And in animals, this telegraph system is facilitated in large part by the nervous system, it wouldn't be necessarily that the nervous system, basically every cell type can do this. But if you want to make it fast, you need to have specialized cells that have a very quick, expensive metabolism, and can send information over very long distances very quickly, which other cell types cannot. So humans are a specific type of cells that allow particular kinds of information processing. And this information processing has the property that it can put stuff on the screen. So it's some kind of computer, it's the thing that can produce arbitrary sequences of patterns if it discovers a suitable function, to produce them and implement them in the distributed networks of cells. And part of what they're doing is that they create a story about a being that lives in the outside world. And in our culture, we have difficulty understanding how that is because we, in our culture as a default, teacher buckets, that what they see is the physical world. And the physical world has sounds and colors, and so on only much later, we tell them well, it's slightly more complicated. And sounds and color are not actually in physics. Everything that you consider to be sounds and colors is photons. Photons make electromagnetic interaction which led air molecules push against each other, so they can form regular shapes. And colors are local dimensions that you get by measuring the sampling frequency of the electromagnetic spectrum, using different receptor types and making a model of them using polar coordinates. Right. So this is something that we don't tell the story fully to our children, which makes it even more confusing. And then we tell them, photons are actually not little billiard balls, but they are regions in the spacetime that have a potential for an electromagnetic interaction. And this space that you're talking about is the photonic space. It's the space where you can possibly unfortunate interactions, for some reason, it's three dimensional. And maybe there are other spaces that are not three dimensional. And maybe in these spaces, you cannot have interacting matter in the same way. Because maybe you will order to get stable objects, you need to make little notes in the electromagnetic structure, or in the spatial structure. And you cannot make notes in 2d and in 4d, they fall apart. So maybe that's the reason or maybe there's another one, and we haven't completely figured it out yet. And there are some candidates that explain why the space that you're in is three dimensional. So why is it that you're interacting with the photonics space and not miss the others? Why are the others not seeming to form a connected space? It's connected letters. But we don't know the answer yet. At least I'm not aware of the work that is sketching out the answer. And if I stumbled on it, I pray that I understand it. But I think that there are other cultures that have a better intuitive understanding of what consciousness is. And if you look around, you find that some cultures don't find consciousness mysterious. I even suspect that in the core of our own culture, before the Tower of Babel that destroyed shared understanding, it's still in there. So a little bit obsessed these days with thinking about Genesis in the Bible, and read this epistemologically correct not as the myths that is a stand in for an origin theory until real science comes along. But as something that is literally true. So what would that mean? You know, I'm talking about the first book, I'm talking about the book that starts out with the creation of sky and darkness, and Heaven and Earth, and so on. And the thing is the story, if you take it literally the way in which Christianity interprets it, it's a story about a supernatural being creating a physical universe. And what's wrong with the story is that whoever tells it to you had no evidence that it was true. Right? So there is no claim. If somebody makes a claim without evidence, you don't have to listen. It could be interesting as a story for cultural reference, or it could be interesting as an idea for something that you could test. But if it's in principle, not testable, this person cannot have that evidence, it is no secret source of knowledge that this person had, there is the principle nothing that that some other person can add. If this was on kind of back channel by talking to a burning bush, that would constitute a valid experiment. So

Joscha Bach 36:07
this reading makes no sense. It wouldn't ever make any sense. But it could make sense, especially if you understand that sky and ground, and light and sound. And plants and animals and their names don't actually exist in physics. Or they only exist in our mind as a division of the universe into separate objects. So they become intelligible to us. And the way in which we construct these objects inside of the mind. So the creation of the universe that has been described in Genesis is not the physicalist universe with quantum mechanics. It's the creation of the experiential universe in which you're actually in, in which we find ourselves to be in. And the first thing that the mind is discovering when he creates this universe is how to make light, right how to create neural oscillators that are creating a contrast between light and darkness. So separate the light from the darkness, and then organize this into multiple dimensions until you get a space. And then you align the space with the information from your vestibular organs. And what you get is the two dimensional plane of the ground, and the three dimensional space of the sky above it. Right. So after you create, like in darkness, you create, literally every mind does this in their cognitive development, the sky and the ground. And then you discover the objects in it. So you basically learn how to model materials in your mind. So you have solids, and you have liquids, and you have organic shapes, and you have animated agents. And then you discover features that you cannot interact with, like celestial bodies, and anchor them in the world, and you learn how to navigate this world. And then you discover all the plants and the animals, when you construct them in your mind, and you associate them all with their names. Again, of course, not a feature of the physical world, they are socially conserved, exchanged, these names and so on, we create this world together. And then last, but not least, be creative person. So the thing that creates it is not a person yet. It's a mind that exists before a person is around, we don't remember how we made light, we don't remember how we discovered the sky and the ground in the first face. This was another observing agent and our own brain. And this observing agent and our own brain, at some point, discovers the needs of a person of the needs of an organism, the organism that its brain is embedded in. And it creates a model of that tool. So it creates an agent that is observing this universe that is embedded in this universe, because this first observer in our own mind, is discovering that such an entity exists. It's useful model to describe reality that there is a person that has needs and desires and social embedding, and dreams and hopes and memories and expectations. And it will create a story of that. And that story is just as real, as the trees that exists in our mind is imaginations, or the trees or the dead in the forest and beyond the horizon. And as real as the sky and the clouds and the colors and so on. But they're all virtual, they're all simulacra. They all exist to tell a story to the organism that is useful for the organism to model the world. And this part, where we become a person seems to be happening, I think, around the age of one and a half to two and a half roughly, in most children that I observed. And at this point, a person that is different from before emerges in their mind. It's not that there is nobody there before. It's just it's a thing before it's different. And you'll notice that there is a gap in their memories they have not released when they're in the first year when you talk to them away, they remember what happened and have expectations already. But later on there is this point where they don't remember these things anymore. It's very weird in most people When you think back don't have memories that they can consciously access between them before they're like two and a half years old. And so I wonder if this transition is the result of just the RE indexing of memories due to our newfound linguistic ability. So we can later on no longer access these memories, or if it's really just basically a new agent that is created by the first agent in its own image, as an observer that is aware of the fact that it's observing. And, but in a different way, as men and women as something that thinks it's a person that thinks it's a human being, and I'm not a human being, I realized that at some level, I don't have an identity as a human being. This is a story that my mind tells itself is an additional thing. My consciousness doesn't have an identity.

Joscha Bach 40:45
My consciousness is also not of the nature that it's the same as everybody else's consciousness, right? It's the question, do we all have the same consciousness looking through different eyes or by separate consciousnesses is in some sense, as meaningless as the question of asking, is the text editor that you're running onto the computer, the same text editor that everybody else runs on their computer? Or is it a different one? Right? Program Vert is, in some sense, a natural law, if you put the circuits of your computer in the same functional configuration, then those things are going to happen with the circuits of your computer, and they will afford the following interactions. But the program word doesn't have an identity. And it's also not that it has no identity in the sense of just enough money for category to apply to it. In the same sense, my consciousness is not in this category that would have an identity on it. So it's, it's not something that is shared with others. And it's not something that is separate from others, it's a principle that applies to the observation. And when the consciousness gets tied to a self model, then it becomes perspectival. And they have an identity and so on. But this identity is a particular kind of model that my organism tells itself by by changing certain factors in my own brain.

Unknown 42:03
Okay, let's let Don respond

Unknown 42:05
by the others. Well, there's quite a bit there. So on the nature of the physical world, and and computation and the finiteness, versus you continued continuity of space, time, and so forth. I think that the word, girdles Incompleteness Theorem is very relevant here that the notion of truth is far deeper than the notion of proof there are any system, any computational system will have things that it can prove. But there will be truths that that computational system cannot access. And if you add those new truths, add a new truth of a girdle statement to your set of axioms, and there'll be yet more truths that cannot be accessed from that. And so what you can compute is always going to be trivial to what is true, there will always be, as far as I can tell, again, is sort of like Newton's notion of we're at the seashore, and the vast ocean, of, of, of reality of the truth, you actually use the word truth, the vast ocean of truth is out there beyond what we can compute. And every truth that you add to your base for come computation doesn't solve the problem. And, and you might say, well, that's that's true, you know, of abstract mathematics. But that's not true of physics. I mean, the physics itself is computable. But that there's some recent work. suggesting that that's that's not the case. So 20 qubit, a physicist and in his colleagues have have recently proved that a very important problem to condensed matter physicists, called the spectral gap problem is not computable. And that's, that's a stunning result. And they also suspect, and they're working on this, they haven't proven this yet. But that something that it's a big open problem, I think the Millennium Prize Committee has is this is one of their problems is to understand the the Yang Mills gas gap problem, which is, you know, why do photons and gravitons have no mass but the weak carriers of the strong weak force, do have mass and cubed and his collaborators think, again, that we're going to find that something non computational is going on here is not decidable. And my guess is that this is just the beginning. That we're going to find that as powerful as computation is and you know, I I was in the Artificial Intelligence Lab at MIT for my PhD and I'm all for AI and for computation and I, you know, I think it's it's fabulous what computation can do and, and the naysayers who think that computation can't do amazing things and artificial intelligence is going to have, you know, important limits that I think that the eighth I disagree with the naysayers. On the other hand, I do believe girdles Incompleteness Theorem is correct. And I do think that the notion of truth is just vastly the the notion of the set of truths. I'll put it this way, the set of things that we can prove from any system is essentially probability zero in the set of all truths. In other words, we're always going to be, as Newton said, on the seashore with with computation and principled reasons. So it's not a Mysterion ism. That's not founded, it's saying, our best theories tell us that truth and proof are not the same thing. And that Proofs will always only leave you on the seashore. And so that's why I mean, I didn't like that conclusion, but you know, girdle proved it, and now physicists are finding it in you know, the spectral gap. And so, as much as I like computation, I'm a computer scientist myself, as much as I like computation, I have to defer to the mathematical proofs that say, computation goes thus far and no further than ask myself okay, how can So, my conceptual system then is itself just a symbolic system

Unknown 46:40
with derivation rules, so what I what I can compute, by my my thought, is also going to be limited, which is why I was saying upfront what I think about scientific theories, right? Scientific theories are gonna have these limitations, we will put down a set of axioms, each theory a good scientific theory will tell you exactly what it assumes. And it will also give you a hint about the kinds of derivations that you can get from those assumptions. And then you use you find what that theory will entail, but our best theories of like quantum theory and relativity and evolution by natural selection, the best theories will also tell you where they stop, they will say we go this far and no further. And for example, physics tells us that space time itself cannot be fundamental, that the very notion of space time cannot be fundamental, which is stunning, because physics for several centuries, has essentially been the study of what happens in space and time. And so to say that space time is not fundamental, means that the physicists have to redefine what what physics is about. And that's what, for example, one mole to Siena and new Marconi 100 are trying to do with things like the cosmological polytopes and Apple to hedron, and so forth are finding structures where there are no Hilbert spaces. So there's no quantum theory, there is no time, there is no space, there are these positive geometries. And what you find is you can predict events in space time like scattering processes that you see at the Large Hadron Collider, you can predict them. And in fact, you, you can actually compute them, in some sense better than if you assume spacetime. So they're finding that what you know, here's Fineman diagrams and try to compute scattering amplitudes for two gluons coming in and four gluons scattering out using the standard quantum field theoretic approaches where space and time is assumed, you get hundreds of pages of algebra, and it's a mask. Whereas if you let go spacetime and look at the structures, with symmetries that cannot be expressed in space time, when you will conformal symmetry, then you find that the same scattering amplitudes can be processed in just two or three terms that you can write down kind of paper on it on a sheet sheet of paper. So all of a sudden you so what they're seeing is, spacetime has had a good run. But if you force yourself to stick with spacetime, then the math is ugly, you get hundreds of pages of algebra to compute scattering amplitudes, you can't see the symmetries that are there, like dual conformal symmetry, if you let go spacetime, you're finding these amazing structures that they don't know what they're about. But all of a sudden, you see the right symmetries and the computations become trivial. So there's some big hint that I think on a couple fronts from girdle and from the work by 20, qubit and his team that the computation is as as powerful as it is, and as much as I love it as an AI person and a cognitive scientist. It has, it's always going to be on the seashore with noodle. And when we let go space time We're still, of course, as theorists always going to have a finite set of axioms and derivations about the world like the cosmological polytopes, and so forth, that Nima and Juan are finding, we're still going to have a finite set of concepts and derivations. So we're not going to get around girdles and completeness theorem, but at least we're we're going beyond the notion of time, which is really critical. And and, and that also cuts up the computational issues pretty interesting. Computational complexity is is about a lot of it is about time complexity. And what physicists are telling us is that ultimately, we're gonna have to let go of the notion of time. And so as computer scientists, we're gonna have to rethink complexity issues, when the very notion of time itself isn't fundamental. So that that's going to be a real, a real kicker for for us in computer science. How do we think about complexity issues, when time itself is not the right way to think about things, and therefore, the sequence of computations in time is not the right way to think about things? We have some really deep thinking, to do ahead. But where I think we share some common ground, your shows, I think that a lot of our experiences and so forth are models that we built, I think that we are building internal models. But the question is, what is the apparatus that's building those models? And I'm saying it's nothing inside space and time. It's so in particular, I'll be very, very explicit. I don't think that neurons exist when they're not perceived. I don't think spacetime exists when it's not perceived, I think neurons and spacetime and even particles are are simply data structures

Unknown 51:58
that we use. And there's a formulation of quantum theory that that's very similar to this is called cubism, quantum Bayesian ism, Chris Fuchs, and David Merman, where were they they take this point of view that it's the every act of observation, in physics, every experiment that you do, is an act of fact creation. Right, that that is not that there are pre existing particles with pre existing states, and you're measuring those those states, rather, the it's there, there's some, you know, they're subjective Bayesian. So all the probabilities in quantum theory are subjective. Probabilities are not objective probabilities. And every outcome is a fact creation. And they do have I mean, Chris Fuchs has a very interesting 2010 paper called cubism that I highly recommended. And in that paper, he actually points to a very interesting quantum discovery, that there's a sequence of what he what's proven is that even if you know what the outcome of your experiment is going to be with probability one, that does not entail that the outcome is there and exists independent of your observation. That's a stunning thing to say, is the probability want, you know, with probability one, what you're going to measure, and you can prove, with with quantum mechanics, that is impossible, that the outcome was there, the value existed before he made the measurement. So that the is really the case that the acts of observation are fact creations, not fact discoveries. So so when we so most of the work that's done in consciousness, assumes, I will say this is 99% of the theories that I've seen my consciousness, assume that spacetime is fundamental. Assume that physical particles are fundamental, and that somehow neural activity in humans, and perhaps other kinds of more complex activity in AIS, creates creates consciousness. But but the very founding assumptions that spacetime is fundamental that neurons exist when they're when they're not perceived, contradicts our best physics. And it also contradicts evolution of natural selection, which, which is very, very clear. Natural selection makes it very clear that the probability is zero, that the sensory systems of any organism tell them any truths about objective reality, as they tell it what what they tell organisms, sensory systems evolved to tell organisms how to behave in order to stay alive, period. That's it. And and so that gives you a user interface for staying alive but but gives you know access to the truth. And that that fits with what physics is telling us that space time as a user interface, but it's not the final truth. And so so what I want from a theory of consciousness as a scientist, is I want a clear statement of what are the what am I assuming? What are the exact things that my theory takes us primitive? What are the exact rules that that allow me to derive things from those primitives? And how exactly do I get the taste of chocolate from that? That's, that's what I'm looking for, from, from a theory of consciousness, precise statement of exactly what I'm assuming upfront with mathematical precision. And then precise derivation, if I'm not taking the taste of chocolate is fundamental. If I'm saying that somehow, some dynamical system is going to give it to me that I want to know exactly which dynamical system is giving me the taste of chocolate, and why that dynamical system could not be the smell of garlic, I want to know exactly, otherwise, there's no there's no real science on the table at all. So that's what I'm looking for, is is theories to say exactly what the assumptions are, and tell me exactly for at least one specific conscious experience, how that conscious experience must be derived in that way. And so so that's where I'm coming from on those. Now, in the case of the cells in the brain, I would just mention something that's very interesting. That's you probably know about Mike Levin's work.

Unknown 56:25
Right. And he's finding that that cells, not just neurons, but any cell in animals that in fact, outside of the brain, they they can learn. And they can compute. And they can do morphogenesis of, of the cells body, they use gap junction, communication, electric. So they're effectively doing what neurons do, but in a very, very different way. And this is all cells can communicate with in this way with gap junctions and so forth. So I suspect that we're going to find that, that neurons aren't special in the sense of being information processors, that information processing. And this seems to be where where Mike it was is heading is that information processing is happening in what he calls these bioelectric fields. Even if there are no neurons, and they can learn, they can retain memories, and they can be very intelligent. And so So even as neuroscientists, we may find that we'll have to expand our horizons beyond neuroscience, you understand if I were a reductionist and trying to do biological reduction, I would at this point with Mike Levin stuff being be interested to say, Oh, well, maybe I wouldn't necessarily reduce consciousness to neural activity, maybe these gap junctions and the computations that cells can do, but also be a suitable format. But But again, I'm not a reductionist in that sense. But that will all stop unless you respond. Yes.

Joscha Bach 58:04
Thank you, you went very far. And while I'm trying to be a little bit more concise, let's start out with good a girdles proof a very profound and not necessarily very positive influence on philosophy. And, basically, to cash and others in philosophy opened up a tradition that where the underlying current is that what good has shown is that mathematics is important to describe reality. And therefore, reality can only be described by people who don't really know mathematics, that is philosophers, philosophers like that intuition. But, but it implies that there is something beyond mathematics that allows you to make sense of things that assign truth. And slightly deeper when you say that you like computation, and you value it, and so on. And you see its limits, it implies that you see what comes beyond these limits. And you're using that thing beyond the limits to think. And they don't think that you are everything in my own mind, that I can observe and observe myself perceiving, when I perceive myself. Reflecting when I perceive myself reasoning, is computational. It means that I go from state to state in a somewhat deterministic way, the random parts are just deleting bits that I computed before. So I have to do it again, the randomness and determinism doesn't help me. So the part of my mind that is relevant to my thinking, is fundamentally computational. What Google discovered and is often misunderstood, and also by Google himself, is is a very important thing. What Google has discovered is not the truth is deeper than proof. That was, in some sense, the suspicion baby, which he started with, he knew that, in his view, that truth is platonic. That things can be true or not, regardless of aw Find out or whether it can be found out. And he hoped to find a notion of truth of truth that could reach truth. And he found that it couldn't, and he found this and the devastating way. And the to the conclusion that there is truths that cannot be found with mathematics. And the opposite is true. There is no deeper notion of truth than truth. You see, perception cannot be true or false. Perception just is physics, physical events out there in the universe cannot be true or false. They just are a pattern that you observe is not true or false, it just is. Right you could be erroneously thinking that you're perceiving a pattern when you don't, because you're suffering from false memory, or a delusion or whatever that makes your thinking of perception inconsistent. But the pattern itself is not true or false. It's an interpretation that can be true or false. And the interpretation is, has to be in a symbolic language to have the property that can be true or false. The perceptual interpretation by itself is not true or false, it just is, right. So in order to be true or false, you need to have a language. And the language needs to be defined in such a way that truth can be established. And the process of establishing truth is a computation. And there are two types of languages in which truth can be defined. And the language of classical mathematics is a stateless language. It's one for time doesn't exist, but everything happens all at once or in some kind of eternal moment. So if you want to go from state to state and this language of eternal mathematics in the stateless language, you just assign an index and then you iterate over the index. And you do this in a single instant in one moment. And the stateless mathematics has a very beautiful property, it allows you to deal with infinities because you can now construct functions that take infinitely many arguments in a single step, perform an operation over them in a single step and give the result back in a single step. It's a language in which you can assign a value to pi. Right and the computational system, you cannot really assign a value to pi, you can have a function that gives you digit by digit, but you never get to the latest last digit. It also means that digit can Pi can never be written down in such a way that you can have a process that relies on knowing all the digits of Pi and consumes them to tune the outcome of some physical process.

Joscha Bach 1:02:27
If you make the switch to a stateful language, in which you can only go from step to step, you're losing certain things, you're losing the ability to three pi as a value of pi is now suddenly a function that you can can only approximate or a certain degree. And many other things stop being values, you will get a fundamental difference between the value of the function and value is something that you have already computed that you know how to compute by extension. And this means that also the truth changes tools is no longer this platonic thing that precedes mathematics. And where we can use mathematics as a tool to figure it out. It has to be contingent on the language in which you use it. If your language has internal contradictions, then truth becomes impossible to determine. Right, you get into areas in this language where it falls apart, you can no longer use it to express coherent thoughts about reality in Korean models about reality, you can never make statements in the language that you can prove outside of the language. So you cannot use your language to prove things that are not cannot be described in the language. Your only hope to prove statements about the universe that you exist in, in your language is that you are able to recreate the observations that you make inside of the language, which means you will create a model of the universe that is so good that it gives you what you observe currently. And then you can hope that the statements that you make in your language captures something about the reality outside of you that gives rise to your observations, of course, you cannot know because it could also be different. But if your language is not able to produce what's on your screen, then your language is wrong. And Hubert basically gave out this task to mathematicians to find a machine any kind of structural sound language that is able to run the semantics of mathematics without breaking and what Gouda discovered is that the semantics of stateless mathematics cannot be recovered. If you assume that there is a solution to get stateless mathematics to work, you will run into contradictions of the way that Google is covered. But there is a way out. You just drop the notion of truth that is independent of the sequence of operations, the number of a set of steps that you took the algorithm that you took to get to your result. It means that when you have a self referential statement like this sentence is false. Right this is a sentence instead of the type that Gouda has shown leads into contradictions. If you assume that there is a stable notion of truth, that is stateless. If you accept the truth is not necessarily a stable value, and you will look at the sentence, then as long as you look at it, the truth value will fluctuate. Because the assumption that the sentence is true will lead to the sentence being false and vice versa. So, suddenly you will have no longer a stable truth predicate. And it just means that the property of the languages in which you can actually do this truth and assign it is that under some circumstances, the truth predicate will not be stable. And it's fine. There's nothing wrong with that. And this same thing applies to the tradings problem that a Turing was dealing with when he came to the halting problem. He defined more originally the Turing machine in such a way that we could translate stateless mathematics into algorithms. And this might require that you have to go through an infinite sequence of steps. And if you make this assumption that you sometimes in order to get to truth, you have to go through an infinite sequence of steps, you run into contradictions. So you might use an unbounded sequence of steps that gives you continuously results, that's fine. But you cannot accept that anything exists in any kind of universe that has causal structure that is going to produce your solution to the halting problem. That is, which would give you back stateless mathematics. So basically, what Google engineering have shown is that stateless mathematics doesn't work.

Joscha Bach 1:06:33
And when you look back at the history of mathematics, mathematicians have never used stateless mathematics, they only pretended to. And ever, they actually wanted to compute something because mathematics, they, under the hood, use stateful descriptions, they never took an infinitely many arguments and perform infinitely many operations on them. And the intuition that stateless mathematics makes sense is because we have this intuition, that continuity, that space and time in a continuous fashion exist. Why do we have this intuition? Well, that's pretty easy to answer, right? The number of things that we interact with, if you zoom in, you find that they are discrete, although observations have a discrete resolution, in time and in space. Our knowledge that we store about these observables is has a discrete number of bits that we can assign to them, there is only a finite number of information that we can access, and that we can deal with as an observer that is embedded in this universe. So everything was discrete to begin with. But it's too many parts to count. If you deal with too many parts to count, the insight, that number of atoms that you are in an ocean, is a finite bounded number doesn't help you at all, because it's still almost infinite from the perspective of an observer. So when you want to describe what the ocean is doing, it doesn't have to count the molecules in it, and to assign locations to them. And what are the interactions doesn't work there is too much. So when you look at the dynamics of too many parts to count, you're looking for operations that converge in the limit, which means they behave quite similar, whether you're using a trillion, or 10 trillion or gazillion particles, right? Once you have these operators that give you the same dynamics, under all circumstances, when you take more and more elements to them. This is this part of mathematics that describes the convergent operators, that's geometry. And some of geometry is uncomputable. So you can only approximate it. But our brain has discovered geometry to deal with the world of too many parts to count. And this plays into what you're pointing out, when you say that our perception doesn't give us reality, it gives us something that we can work with. Of course, the reality that you're embedded in has too many parts to count, we need a different reality, we need one that you can actually handle, even if it's not computable and can only be approximated. And this exponential reality is a very coarse simplification, it's about as coarse as a gaming engine is when you play a computer game as compared to real physics. It's not much better than that. In many ways, it's even worse, which you can verify if you put yourself into a lucid dream and look at the fidelity of what your brain is able to generate. Light switches will usually not work, you will not be able to read the same stuff twice on the same page. And you imagine it and so on, there's only so many bits in your working memory, the fidelity of what your perceptual system can track and imagine is limited. It's relatively easy to overcome that don't really know what the number of bits of my working memory is. And that would be very curious to find out. But it's not as big as I thought when I was a child. It's not infinite. It's not unlimited. Perception of infinity is super easy to generate when your mind is very finite, super easy to overwhelm my finite resolution mind.

Joscha Bach 1:09:52
So this deep thing that Google is misunderstood that Google has not discovered that mathematics cannot reach truth. But the truth is no more than the result of a sequence of steps that is compressing a statement to axioms losslessly and doesn't go beyond that. That was the deep insight. And it's one that basically has not percolated in most areas of philosophy and even physics yet, because the physicists have checked out the code base for mathematics before that result was obtained and understood. So basically, that we need to switch from continuous stateless mathematics to constructive mathematics that was not understood back then. And needs to be understood now. So basically, my question to somebody like Donald would not be so much how would you explain the spectral gap form because I think problems of this case of this type are really the result of using continuous notions of space time, and infinities and assuming them as given. So that's a statement about certain theories that are expressed in the language that has inconsistencies in this language with these inconsistencies, you get to the point that you cannot get certain results, it's also an issue of computational irreducibility, which is difficult to understand in stateless mathematics, computational irreducibility is a property of a system. That means that you cannot obtain the state of the system. Without running the system to that point, there is no way to predict the system, except by taking the system because all its detail and fidelity. And going through the sequence of steps, you cannot predict what the universe is going to do when the universe is computational, irreducible, you're going to predict some things, but not all of things in the same things only with a certain degree of certainty, because you can often not insulate them from the parts that you cannot predict because they are computationally reducible. In the universe in various played out and implemented in a stateless language. That is a confusing property. Because the cost of computation doesn't play a role when you are in a stateless universe in a stateful universe, the number of state transitions that your model needs to make plays suddenly a certain role and this specter of computational irreducibly doing large, it means that you cannot compute things for practical reasons, because you don't have enough information yet. And you cannot have information to make that prediction. But there is no deep miracle that is not caused by the language, when you discover that the spectral gap problem is incline computable. So my question to Donald would be, if you think that there is a limit to computation that you can see, and beyond that, you would still do something and make statements. What is it that you use to make statements beyond the limits of computation? What parts of of your mind are you drawing from? And you make statements beyond what the computational system can derive?

Unknown 1:12:51
Right, so, so Well, one way of trying to focus this would be to talk about the integers versus the real numbers and rational numbers. So from your point of view, you're sure is it? Do you think that so for example, if we look at just the set of all functions from the integers to the integers, right? It's trivial to show that that's not countable. So yet, Turing showed that the set of computable functions is countable, the Secretary machines is countable. So so in that simple example, just to make things very, very concrete, the set of all functions from the integers to the integers isn't countable, the Turing computable functions are countable. And so there's a sense in which the Turing computable functions have measure zero, they have their probabilities, zero and the set of all of all functions. So do we want to conclude from from this computational point of view, that, that all those other functions don't exist with it that we're sort of when I say, so you're saying those functions? So real numbers don't exist? Real numbers? Yes,

Joscha Bach 1:14:07
for something to exist, it has to be implemented. If it's something is not implemented anywhere, it doesn't make sense to claim that it exists. I think it's a confusion of the notion of existence to say that something that is not implemented and is not implementable could exist. There are things that use patterns that we observe in order to exist and need to be implemented. Right? So do you could say that's the financial system exists well exists to the degree that it's implemented. There are some boundaries where we projected that it's not actually implemented, where it doesn't actually exist on the same course approximation. But by and large, something exists right some struck causal structure is implemented here. The set of all the functions between the interfaces is not implementable, therefore it doesn't exist. It's something that you can specify. And this difference between specification and existence is something that is very obvious to a computer science. First, and sometimes not obvious to a traditional mathematician, there is stuff that you can specify that makes no sense. It is only specifiable in your language, but it's because your language is much more permissible, then the set of things that can be, can exist. And computation is less permissible computation only permits you to build things that can actually exist. If you can build things that cannot exist. It's a problem of your language in which you're building things. It's not a problem with reality, just confused.

Unknown 1:15:29
I have a comment. This one's from Professor Edward Lee of Berkeley, and it may provide some insight and you both can tell us your thoughts on this. So this is from Professor Edward Lee of Berkeley, this question is a major theme in the second half of my book Plato in the nerd UTMC. So universal Turing machines have the following properties. Number one, their operation is a sequence of discrete steps. Number two, the data comes from a countable set. And number three, that sequence terminates, it is a huge leap of faith to assume that physical processes have any of these constraints I show in Plato and the nerd that the hypothesis that physical processes all have these properties is actually untestable. I remember earlier Yoshio, you mentioned that if it's untestable, you can't provide evidence for it and and perhaps it shouldn't be talked about. So this reminded me of this. And he says in brackets, this follows from an information theorem due to Claude Shannon known as the channel capacity theorem. The converse hypothesis that the physical world is not so constrained is also untestable. By experiment. But I argued in Plato in the nerd that the converse hypothesis leads to simpler models of the universe, and therefore is a better choice by outcomes razor, my claim is that universal Turing machines is realized on today's computers are simulations, quote, unquote, of a process that is fundamentally non algorithmic. So I just want to place that out there. And perhaps you can use that as a jumping off board, Donald, and then you OSHA.

Unknown 1:16:54
Very interesting, I'll want to read that book to make sure I understand what what from Mr. Lee is saying that's quite interesting. So Plato in the mirror,

Unknown 1:17:02
I'll be interviewing Edward at some point in the next few weeks as

Unknown 1:17:05
well. Oh, oh, very good. Yeah, that's, that's really quick, because these are very, very deep issues. It seems to me that this also interacts with what the physicists are telling us that there is no time fundamentally. So So if if time is not fundamental, then these computational issues where there are fundamental limits to what can be computed, because we're assuming time, a sequence of so in, in computer simulations, computer algorithms, we're assuming a sequence in time of computations that can be in the kinds of limits that Yossi was talking about, that seems to me, are a consequence of assuming time to be fundamental. And if we have to go to a physics in which time is not fundamental, then that that places this whole our whole conversation in a completely different context. And so maybe what we may be pointing to is, time has been a very useful and helpful thing for physics for several centuries. And now the hard work that we have to do is to understand how to go beyond the notion of time. And when we go beyond the notion of time, we'll the kind of discussion we're having right now be fundamentally revised, the computational versus non computational notions, we may have to really revise how our whole conversation here is going. I'd be very interested in what your she has to say on that.

Joscha Bach 1:18:39
Thank you, also, thanks, Edward Lee, for your argument. I concur with you that it's in principle, not testable, what physics is really like, what we can only say is which theory that we can come up with is more elegant for AI is a small thing. I think that this notion that the Turing machine has to get result after a finite sequence of steps might be a mistake in the sense in which tool machines were originally defined. So basically, a computer that can be built is not a Turing machine in the sense, but it's always a finite state machine. And in a finite state machine, you can have a number of steps, sequence of steps that is unbounded, that doesn't stop. And that gives you more and more digits of pi, but you're looking at, in a sense, it doesn't come to a conclusion if you want to compute physics, but it's not the problem to build a computer that as long as it runs gives you more digits of pi. And so I think from a formal perspective or from it doesn't make much of a difference, but computers can easily fix it. But it's important, if you think about your intuitions about how things work or the proofs that you make in other contexts, that the value of computation doesn't hinge on therapy. In a finite number of steps until a computation, that is going to give you a result that was formulated, classical mathematics terminates, but that it means that everything that you get is the result of finite interactions. And if you assume that infinite interactions are possible, you run into the difficulties that Google insuring has have discovered, which means that your theory is no longer work, they no longer make sense. And different from Edward, and maybe doing him injustice here I've not read this book is. So I would say that it's much more elegant from the perspective of Occam's razor to describe reality in a language that doesn't break. Because there's your language breaks, and you're still trying to make a model of reality, it's going to be arbitrarily expensive, it doesn't work, you have to find a language that works. So if you find that the languages in which we can describe reality, you have to be computational languages, because the others lead into contradictions, then you have to use the computational languages, that's the situation that I find myself to be in. This doesn't mean that I can know what physics is like. It just means that all the physics that I can talk about without my language breaking, has to play out in this way. The notion of what is time. So coming back to Donald is, is very important that there are two notions of time one is this intuitive notion that we have as human beings, which is basically this Newtonian time, this time, which various blocks run the same speed everywhere and so on. And that describes the transition of the universe from the past into the future via the present. And this notion of time is somewhat similar to the notion of the straight state transition in your computer, except that the state transition to the computer has some kind of global clock, everything and the computer goes from state to state all at once and goes, a progresses to the next step. But what we see in our universe, that it only makes sense, if we assume that it's dynamic, if the universe would just be a decoupled sequence of states without a transition function, there would not be any law that you can discover there is nothing that we can control organisms would not exist in the way in which they do. So we, from the observations that we make, we have to assume that the transitions in the universe are somehow fundamental that the universe is moving. And state transitions seem to be crucial. In order to be able to understand the universe, there is some notion of transmission, and there's no sort of transmission is much more basic than time. And the time that we are talking about when we see that time is not fundamental, and the notion of space time is relativistic time. The relativistic time is what the universe looks like to a relativistic observer. And we can obtain relativistic time if we understand that what we perceive as time is basically the speed of the clocks in our environment. And the speed of the clocks that we observe depend on our own speed. So if I move you through the universe, and you are a supervenience pattern on the structure of the universe, imagine the universe is something like an ocean. And the present is the crest of a traveling wave. So that ocean

Joscha Bach 1:23:15
and there are waves maybe in front and behind us, but they're not our futures are past their different universes, that just happened to be a little more along with less along the future and past would require you to leave the crest of the wave and you can't, because you're always traveling with the wave. So, there is no way to leave that present, because only the present exists from the perspective of that crest, and you will maybe have what is inscribed on the crest of that traveling wave. And the rotation that the vortex is doing when it updates itself to observe the universe to form a memory and so on to register its perceptions and so on will depend on the speed in which this vortex rotates. Right. And so, if the vortex is moving along with the wave, then the updates in the vortex are a function of the movement in the wave itself the basic parasitize on the movement of the main wave. And you cannot as this vortex traveling this debate ever leaves the base you can move a little bit in this innovative to the left or to the right that is moving to the left or to the right would be movement in space, you cannot move in time you just move with the time right and the faster you move to the left or to the right, the less there will be updates available for internal your internal state. So the fluctuations of the vortex becomes slower and slower, the more the vortex moves in space and this leads to relativistic time it means that from the perspective of the vortex when it looks at its environment, the environment gets distorted and time and space. So in this notion, we realize why something would look like to a vertex that moves like this, like relativistic time if you understand that the relativistic time from the fundamental perspective how To make all this happening, how to build a system that functions like this cannot be fundamental. It's a result to the observer, it will be what the universe looks like to the observer of the observers events, as we always do. Right. But it is not fundamental, but fundamental other state transitions. So what we need to do is basically replace the physicalist time, that is relativistic, for good reason, in the frame of certain models by something that is more fundamental, and allows us to derive the relativistic time and this would be state transitions.

Unknown 1:25:33
Very interesting, there's some in that spirit, or at least in that kind of direction, there's work by Marcus Mueller and Philip Hahn. And then also some, some more recent work by Fabio mercati. And, and Giovanni Emiliano Camillia, where we're, they're showing how relativistic spacetimes can be constructed from exchange of quantum information. So you don't assume it upfront, but you try to get a dictionary to that allows different quantum agents to send information back and forth. And it turns out, if you send enough information back and forth, and try to set up a dictionary to make everything consistent, you will get Einstein's special relativistic spacetime coming out of it. So that's, that's, that's an interesting direction to go. Another interesting direction, to think about what just a simple notion, time and entropy or or least physical time and entropy are deeply connected. And so we would like to have some way of getting entropic time coming out of a deep root system in which there is no entropic time, right. And there there is a, I'm not saying this is the deepest way of doing it. But an interesting simple way, just in the case of Markovian dynamics. So if I have a Markovian, system, homogeneous, and it's in the stationary, then the entropy of that system doesn't change. So if for state x of n, and x n minus one, and so forth, the entropy H of X of n equals h of x sub n minus one for all n. So you so there is no entropic time you. But it's trivial to prove that if you just do a simple conditioning, if I, if I look at xn, given x one, or x Yeah, XN given, then it turns out that h of xn, given x one is greater than or equal to h of xn, given xn minus one. In other words, the very fact of doing conditioning, which is projection, so you can think about it, I take this dynamical system, which has a notion of state transition as a Markov chain, but doesn't have any entropic time. But as soon as you start projecting that that non entropic system onto different perspectives by by conditioning, h of x n given x one, all of a sudden now you have entropy. And so now you have that kind of notion of time, so So is that a direction that we could go where, where we could still have some sense of dynamical system, but it's not an entropic time system, and show how we get spacetime arising from that in the weather that some of these businesses are trying to do. I think that will be be interesting. I think that it's a separate question whether the real numbers exist versus right, that's, it's a pretty strong statement to say that real numbers don't exist. That's really quite interesting to say that they don't exist. But I guess that's where you want to go anyway.

Joscha Bach 1:29:06
Yeah, well, I agree with political rights, that real numbers don't exist, and the time was not right back then sort of real numbers are actually functions. And you can can give you this function instead of a real number, and the kids can give you as many digits as you want, as you can afford to compute, but this is it, it's fine. So basically, real numbers can be derived in a deterministic fashion, they are determined once they are predetermined in the sense, but you will not know the billions digit of the square root of two unless you find a procedure to compute it and the energy or the neck entropy to actually get there. And this derivation of a result via using APNIC entropy I think relates to our perception of time this causal arrow of time, which is aligned with the entropic arrow. Eric treasure finds very good metaphor in his book good and real, I think to give an intuition how is the metric system for the transitions are symmetric in both directions, is still not going to be symmetric at scale when you look at it. So it takes as an example of all that is made of large and small billiard balls. And did you put one of these billiard balls in motion and the transact in between the variables all symmetrical, which means if you take a movie and you play it forward and backward, you will see for the every interaction between two billiard balls, that it's the same if you go the movie backwards or forwards. It's a simplified model where you have no friction. And so you have no thermodynamic stuff going on, we look at the universe at a level where thermodynamics doesn't exist yet. Because there's maybe the stuff is too small to have these losses, right. So we just look at the billiard ball universe where everything is deterministic, and without noise. And in this model, what we see is that when we zoom out, that is something that is happening at scale. And that is, some balls move after they have been hit, and keep moving, hitting other balls. And then, if you play the movie backwards, it looks as if some balls are anticipating that they are going to be soon hit, and start moving. As a result as if they would be hit right. So there is this assymetry, that your balls leave awake behind them. And this vache is describing in some sense, the entropy that we are looking at in our universe, that's the direction in which you can as an embedded observer for memories, because in order to form memories, you rely on the dissipation of information between locations. And so whenever there is a way to form memories, it means that you are aligned with some kind of entropic arrow. If you zoom out, it means that you can now sort the states of the universe in such a way that you discovered the concentric wave that you are, that you are part of our ocean like universe has a point of origin. And this point of origin is a construction that you make you discover this by the wave expanding, and you discover it by information moving diffusing across the locations and the wave. So there is a hypothetical point in the middle, where the information is not diffused yet. And this hypothetical point is what we imagined to be the big bang. Right? And it's a mathematical singularity in a way, because if you are in the Big Bang, you don't know which direction to go unless the Big Bang is not completely perfect and symmetrical. And the interesting thing about this before the Big Bang, means it's it's the wrong question to ask because before the Big Bang, if you looked at it, it's like an Moray pattern. This would be the point where the information goes out of distribution or gets distributed or of diffuse has been locations in the other direction, every point of every trajectory that goes away from the big bang, goes into a future

Unknown 1:33:15
Sorry to interrupt is this related to the Janus point? Have you heard of Julian Barbara's theory of time?

Joscha Bach 1:33:21
No, no, but it's, it's an artifact of a certain description basically be created certain mental model, in which we describe the entropic arrow of time as the diffusion of information across locations in the universe. And then we imagine that there is a single point where this ends up and you go through this point on the other side, you go back into another future. So the further we go away from this point in any direction, the further further we go into a future in which systems could form memories of the past. And to form memories of the past, you need to have some kind of reservoir of Nick entropy that you can tap in some kind of puddle of Nick entropy. And then you can reason about the conditions how such puddles of Nick entropy could form under which conditions and how long they might last.

Unknown 1:34:08
I would like to get to the topic of freewill as well and then also some audience questions. So why don't you Donald outline your views on freewill?

Unknown 1:34:19
Okay, yeah. Yes. In a physicalist framework, which so now we'll just talk about what most of my cognitive neuroscience peers think, right? Most of them assume that that physical systems are fundamental neural activity causes all our behavior. And in that case, there can be a fiction of useful fiction of of free will but but it's really just going to be a useful fiction and if I do something is really my neurons. With the neural activity, that that did it. And there is a sense in which you can say, I chose to do it because actually, neurons are part of me. So I, then I think that's the point of view that Dan Dennett takes, for example on this and, and and Sam Harris replies on that. He says, Well, yeah, I also grow my fingernails. I'm not sure that I'm doing that by free will. But you know, so so it's not real clear that just because my neurons are doing it, I have free will just in the same sense that I'm not using free will to grow my my, my fingernails. So So Sam would say there's no such thing as freewill if you're a physicalist, Dan Dennett would say I'm a physicalist. And there is this important notion of freewill. I think that, of course, spacetime isn't fundamental. And so that we have to completely think outside of that box altogether. And as scientists, we have to say upfront what our hypotheses what our axioms are, fundamental assumptions are. And, and be very clear about them upfront. This conscious agents in the mathematics, they get certain inputs, we call them experiences that they have. And then they they there's a something called a Markovian kernel that describes what actions they take. And those actions affect the experiences of other conscious agents. So then there's so that's just the mathematics that my team has written down is a very simple notion of a Markovian dynamics of conscious agents interacting. And, and it's not an physicalist framework, we're we're assuming that this is, you know, in its own world, right, these are conscious agents. And that's the foundation space and time are not the foundation of conscious agents. So conscious experiences and interactions of conscious agents are the foundational notion. And so then the question is, how should we understand the probability? So if I get a particular experience that comes into a conscious agent, and it then probabilistically affects the experience of other agents? How should I understand that probability? That it? Shall I understand it as as a freewill choice? Or, or what? And you know, I could say, you know, I refuse to answer the question, I just just there's a probability there. And that's, that's as far as I go with, with a theory there's, you know, this agent. So I leave that probability as just where my theory stops, right? I say, in some sense, whenever we see a probability in a theory, that's where explanation stops, right? That's, that's basically saying, I don't know, like my so whenever. So instead, is whenever you have a scientific theory, you see probabilities coming up. You're seeing the theory, say this is where I halt. This is where my explanation stops. And there are two major approaches toward understanding those probabilities, the objectivist and subjectivist. To probabilities, right? So objective is say that these probabilities are pointing to some real thing in the world, there is some real random generator in the world. And subject to the say, No, these are just degrees of belief. Whenever you see probabilities, you're only talking about degrees of belief. But in either case, explanation stops, right? How do I come to that belief? Well, I can only tell you probabilities. What does that random, objective process? I don't know. But I can just tell you on probabilities. And so so really, whenever you see probabilities in a scientific theory, and they're all over the place, I read that as saying, Here's where explanation stops, and our theories or theories halt. And if we want to go further, we're gonna have to unpack that probability into some some deeper, deeper theory. So

Unknown 1:39:18
if I say that it's freewill in the case of the conscious agents, then, I mean, in some sense, there's just words what what theory has is the probabilities and it has no further explanation. So if I say if I call the probability of freewill, then I you know, I can call it that but but I haven't really done much to give much insight into the notion of free will free will then becomes a primitive and maybe that's what I want to do. I want to say this is where explanation stops. And so freewill is primitive. So when these probabilities are freewill, and I agreed to that, that's where my theory stops that I like I can do no further. Now, what's interesting in the in the the conscious agent dynamics that we're working on is that any group of conscious agents together also satisfy the definition of a conscious agent. And so they are a conscious agent. So any conscious agents interacting are also conscious agents. So there in the theory, there's one conscious agent, because if you take all of them together, they will form one conscious agent. But then there are many. If you're computational, there's only a countable number of them were in my case, I don't know if it may be an uncountable number of, of conscious agents. But what's interesting is that the you unpack this probability in the Markovian kernel, there could be one big probability for the one agent, but you can unpack that into all these dynamical systems that are interacting conscious agents with their own probabilities and their own kernels. And what's what's interesting is that you could then give in some sense an unpacking of the notion of freewill, and that way you can say well, yeah, the one agent has free will and this this probability, but I can actually do some non trivial unpacking of that notion in this sort of recursive unwinding of those probabilities throughout the network. So, there is the possibility here of I mean, ultimately, there will be a primitive notion of free will that is just primitive and not explained. But given that one I can explain all these other free wills sort of interacting arising from this most primitive notion of free will, in a non trivial, non trivial way. But But once again, I would I would point out something that I see all the time in scientific theories, no theory in science will ever explain everything. And I would love to see if your show agrees or disagrees, I will just state to make a strong claim. There cannot be a theory of everything, because every theory has to make assumptions. And those assumptions are not explained. They're assumed. It's just as simple. Okay, am I

Unknown 1:42:12
correct in my summary of your views on freewill, that if in a physical theory, you have probability, now some of that probability is just due to our ignorance. But if there's a fundamental probability, you can just say, well, that's indicating that the theories break down and we just don't know. Or you can say that there's something underneath producing those and that which is underneath the probabilities, is what you're calling freewill. Is that correct? Or is that off?

Unknown 1:42:37
Right? So if I'm a physicalist, also that that probability is due to some process that I can say no more about, but there's some process that generates the stuff is not free will there's just a physical process that, I don't know. But if I'm taking consciousness to be fundamental, then it's an interesting move to say that, that that free that that probability, can be interpreted as freewill. Now, of course, I'm not explaining anything, I'm not even. I'm just putting the frame for the notion Free Will the word free will on it right. And, and free will becomes just a primitive notion as well. So that's where my explanation stops. And I'm the most unpacking I can do is that recursive unpacking that I that I mentioned, which is an interesting unpacking. But ultimately, there's this primitive notion of freewill that I have nothing further to say about. But But I think that that's not a problem specific to this theory. I, the last thing I was saying was that that's endemic to all scientific theories, every scientific theory will have miracles at its foundation. By miracles, I mean, assumptions that are taken for granted, and not explained. If you explain them, then you have a deeper theory with new assumptions that explain those assumptions. But the new assumptions aren't explained. And so in this sense, science can never have a theory of everything, because science theories always have assumptions. And the assumptions are what you don't explain.

Unknown 1:44:05
Your show I know Donald said, quite a few. There are quite a few elements to pick from there.

Joscha Bach 1:44:10
We interlocking claims, but let's address them. First of all, I don't know whether there can be as one theory of everything, because my reasoning is not tight enough to have to make that proof one way or the other. So at this point, I have to remain agnostic, because it's a from various standard seems to be possible that they can be a theory of everything and it seems to be possible that they cannot from a computational perspective, whenever you have a set of observations that is finite finite, you will be able to construct a computational model that explains how to make such patterns. So in principle, there can always be a theory of everything that you observe. Is this something that I cannot I don't see a way around it. So this seems to be sound to me and I think that can be formally proven. But it seems to be almost trivial that it's to prove until it's more interesting. The question is, can you narrow this down to a single one to one theory of everything? It will be, you will be always stuck with infinitely many theories of everything where most of these theories will be super inelegant and redundant and basically recordings of your observations. Or will there be one theory that is the most elegant and explains everything deeply and wraps it up. And of course, if you think about the space of all theories, and think of them as things that you can do in a language, and in which you can define truth, and if you realize that the languages in which you can define truth consistent, these are the computational languages, it turns out that all your models are going to be automata. And that you can sort the space of automata by the length of the definitions. So it also seems that in principle, it should be possible to find the shortest automaton between two every pair of automata that you can construct and Kannapolis. Now the question is, what's your search procedure for all the possible automata? I do have a search procedure that you can hope that terminates. And this is not a question of whether it's mathematically possible. But whether it's efficient. So is there an efficient strategy to find a theory of everything that is the shortest one. And so far, we haven't found one. And it relates to what AI is doing and machine learning when it tries to identify what's going on in the domain.

Joscha Bach 1:46:33
So in principle, we can always be sure that we could be a brain in a vat and everything is just a nefarious conspiracy, that is playing out. And because we cannot exclude this, we can never be sure that our theory of everything is, is the best theory that could exist, of things. So that's obviously the case. But if we take out this single thing, and make the assumption that reality is not a conspiracy, I think then it starts to look a lot brighter. Let's get to the notion of free will. I think that freewill is tied into the notion of agency. And the best explanation of what an agent is that I found so far is that an agent is a control system that is intrinsically combined with its own set point generator of control system is a notion from cybernetics. That means you have some system like a thermostat, that is making a measurement using sensors, for instance, the temperature in the room, and that has effectors by which it can change the dynamics of the system. So the effector of would be a switch that turns the heating on and off, and the system that's being regulated is the temperature in the room, and the temperature in the room is disturbed by the environment. And a simple thermostat will only act on its present measurement and then translate this present measurement using a single parameter into whether it should switch or not. And depending on choosing that parameter, well, you have a more efficient regulation or not. But if you want to be more efficient, you need to model the environment and the dynamics of the system, and maybe the dynamics of the sensory system and the actuator itself. When you can do this, it means that you model the future of the regulation based on past observations. So if you endow the controller is the ability to make a model of the future and use this control model. To fine tune the actions of the controller, it means that there's a controller now is more than a thermostat, it's not going to just optimize the temperature in the room the next frame, but it's going to optimize the integral of the temperature over a long time span. So it basically takes a long expectation horizon for us further goes, the better probably, and then it tries to minimize all the temperature deviations from the ideal temperature from the setpoint. Over that time span. This means that depending on the fidelity or detail of the model of its environment, and its interactions with the environment itself, it's going to be better and better if it assumes that there are trajectories in the world that are the result of its own decisions. Right, by turning the temperature on and off at this particular point in time, I'm going to get this and this result depending on the weather outside, depending on how often people open and close the door to the room at different times of the day, depending on the aging of my sensor or the distance of my sensor to the heating and depending on whether the window and on top of the sensor is currently open or closed, and so on, and get lots of models more ways to differentiate the event flow in the universe and the paths that the universe can take. And the interactions that are that I can have as the University of determine whether somebody will open the window and so on and so on. Right. So you have all these points where the controller is a very differentiated model of reality, where it's going to prefer some events of others and it's going to assign its own destiny. adhering to these trajectories. And this decision making necessarily happens under conditions of uncertainty, which means the controller will never be completely sure which one is going to be the right decision, the controller will have to make educated guesses bets on the future. And this even includes the models of itself, right, the better the control system understands itself and the limitations of its modeling ability, the better its models are going to be. So at some point of complexity, this thing is going to understand its own modeling procedure to improve it, and to find gaps in it and so on. And this also means that when it starts to do this, it is going to discover that there are agents in the world other controllers that have set points, generators and model the future and make decisions. For instance, people that might open the window when you make the room too odd. And you lose energy because of that, right. So maybe not overheat the room. And people can

Joscha Bach 1:50:54
read this, this means you have to model agency at some point. And you will also discover yourself as an agent and develop as a controller as a set point generator and the ability to model the future. And you will discover this before you understand your own modeling of the future works. So you also have to make bets on how you will work before you understand yourself. So you will discover a self model, the self model is the agent where the contents of your own model are driving the behavior of that agent. And it's a very particular agent, it's one where your reasoning and your modeling has an influence on what this agent is going to do a direct coupling. It's a very specific model, very specific agent that you discover there. And so in some sense, freewill I think is a perspective on decision making under uncertainty, starting from the point where you discover your own self model, up to the point where you deconstruct it again. And of course, you will construct it again at some point, you will be able to fully understand how you're operating. And once you do this, making your decision becomes indistinguishable from predicting your decision. And because of computational irreducibility of you will not be able to predict the decision for you make it right. But as soon as you understand that there is just a computational process going on. And you are understand the properties of that process, you will no longer experience yourself as having freewill. freewill is a particular kind of model that happens as a result of your own self model being a simulacrum, instead of being a high fidelity simulation of how you actually work. And we are young beings, we don't get very old, it's very difficult for us to get to the point where we fully understand how we work, except in certain circumstances, right? When we observe our children, very often we get to the point as parents that we fully understand what they will be doing in the given situation, when we can fully understand their own actions and anticipate their decisions and the child might experience that it has free will, the experience that child has free will up to the point where we suddenly understand Oh, this is what's going on. And at this point, I can completely control the child because you can out model it. Right. And it's only to the point where this system is going to introduce levels that are again reaching my own level that decisions become unpredictable. But if I am a few levels of monitoring depths, above the other agents that might think that it's possible, the free will start to disappear from my own perspective, and also happens in my own mind. There's many things that I do. But Assad is a child and acting out of my own free will. And now I understand how mechanical it is. And I can deal with myself by controlling myself by out modeling myself successively, and becoming one more complex in this way.

Unknown 1:53:39
And all that you're short the computational process, the probabilities in the transition rules, you would view those as objective probabilities.

Joscha Bach 1:53:50
So there's also this issue that I don't actually exist in the way in which I model myself, I only exist to some degree of approximation. I'm not this big tree that is strictly implemented in physical reality. I'm more like a bunch of shrubbery. And some of the shrubbery is tasked with making a model of myself as a tree. And that model is going to be a core approximation. So the fact that I am unable to follow up on my plans means that I'm only approximately implemented,

Unknown 1:54:19
right? The rubber hand illusion is a good example of how we're continually redefining who we are, right? Were, you tap and drag on a hand at the same time you're tapping and dragging on a rubber hand, just write with a person, they'll take this rubber hand and incorporate it into their body image. So we're always learning who we are. But those probabilities and that learning process, you would take subjective probabilities and not freewill kinds of probabilities.

Joscha Bach 1:54:44
And what does it mean that the probability is objective? It only means based on the models in which which I have currently made and if I go far beyond back I cannot assign an objective probability to the probabilities that I am observed. Even because they are contingent on the assumption, for instance, I'm probably not in a dream, or that my memories are correct or that my data are correct, or that the theories that event and to establish the relationships between my measurements and my data and so on are correct. So, I do agree that at some point, there are a lot of assumptions that go into this. And these assumptions are different because you are usually mild, because it makes so many observations that at some point, I can the hours cancel each other out, or there's so many people that can verify my ideas and shut them down. So my ideas don't exist in isolation, they are being shot against every philosophy and physics book that I can get my hands on, and that I understand, right, and every conversation that I have. So that doesn't mean that I will discover the truth in this way. But it means that I discover many, many of the possible errors that I can make. And at some point, I realized that there is a finite space of theories that exists, and that we are discovering the same things again and again. So when we ask ourselves what are integers, for instance, or what are rational numbers, there are many ways of making theories about what integers are, for instance, we can say that there are there cardinalities of sets, or so basically, you count members of the set, and this is an integer and all the numbers of members of sets that you can have are integers. Or you can say that there are a subsequent labeling scheme. It's the definition that I currently prefer. Or you can use piano's axioms to formalize them. And it turns out that they all describe exactly the same thing. There are all different perspectives on the same thing. And once you understand the larger space that surrounds the industries, you also understand why they are different perspectives because you understand how these perspectives are being constructed. And you can show that it's all the same thing. And this so in some sense, the integers are fractal. And you can describe this fractal using a generator function. And you can also describe it in many other ways. And it seems that mathematics or all the languages that you can use that work are usually small, relatively intelligible set of fractals, and there are the boundary of what it's intelligible to the human mind. But not that far above it, and probably still inside of it. So I'm more optimistic than you are.

Unknown 1:57:21
I have a question for the both of you. It's about your models, how much of it would have to change, let's say yoga in your case, if classical logic was indeed, correct, if continuities exist, and for Donald, if the opposite was true, so continuity doesn't exist. intuitionist logic is primary.

Joscha Bach 1:57:41
So it's some point in my life, I thought that continuity must exist, because everybody was assuming that they did, like most of the eminent physicists thought that the universe must be fundamentally continuous. Many of the foundational theories that we have in physics, assume that there is continuity. And I just thought that my inability to derive continuity to construct the continuous system is the result of my lack of understanding. And it took me quite some time to realize that what Google has stumbled upon, was actually the insight that continuity cannot exist, because it's not constructive cannot be implemented. So once you have the infinities, you have, once you presuppose them, there are an amazing cornucopia, all sorts of stuff falls out, like you have Herbert's hotel that is completely booked out. But there's infinitely many rooms, and then there are infinitely many buses coming on and just ask everybody to move in the room, this twice the number, and then you fit in the infinitely many new people, right?

Unknown 1:58:44
This is not a feature. This is a back,

Joscha Bach 1:58:47
this shouldn't happen. And all hotels work, no hotels work like this. This is not good if something like this happens. And it's not surprising that this blows up when you try to make proofs. And so I think that hotel points not to a miracle in the universe, that under certain circumstances, you get something for nothing, which is very nice if you wanted to write the universe from nothing, but it shows that your language can break. And so I don't see a way to get the languages in which continuity exists to work, and I cannot exclude that I'm wrong. And I might see a way in the future or somebody else does in a way that I don't, I just don't see a way how to make continuity work. But get all the benefits from continuity for the description of practical systems using discrete logic. So in this sense, I would say that dynamical systems that are truly continuous don't exist, they're not causally existing, they cannot be causal. They are a layer of description that I use to deal with too many parts to count and they are sometimes very useful abstraction, but they cannot be used for a foundational theory because the foundational stuff has to work, it has to be described in a language, all the parts have to interface and straightaway that your language doesn't blow up. Because otherwise, the terms in your language don't mean anything. So what this means is that the word continuity does not actually mean anything in my world, it does not have a useful reference. I cannot point at anything that is totally continuous without my language breaking. So it doesn't exist. It's a word that only exists as a confusion. But it exists approximately, it exists as the dynamics of too many points to count, which is fine.

Unknown 2:00:35
So I'm a confused men.

Joscha Bach 2:00:37
And when you say that the language is breaking, I just see it as you saying that they're extremely unintuitive results that? Well, they don't seem to make sense. But it doesn't mean that they don't make sense because you defined work as was implementable. You know what it doesn't work means that you can no longer derive truth. It means, for instance, in axiomatic system, if you have a contradiction in your axioms, it means that you can suddenly derive everything. And nothing. It just means that your fractal is no longer having a discernible structure. This is what it means that it's breaking.

Unknown 2:01:11
What is the exact contradiction in classical logic? Because it seems as though mathematicians are getting along fine. And it's difficult, extremely difficult to prove certain theorems. And it wouldn't be if there was a contradiction. Well, not necessarily, but you understand what I mean?

Joscha Bach 2:01:26
Yes. So the issue is that the assumption of a stateless platonic notion of truth that holds independent of the process by which you discover the truth leads into contradictions. And this was what girdle had proven, it basically means that a sentence that is true under these assumptions is also false under these assumptions, so it cannot be true. And this is where undecidability comes in. It just is not just about that some sentences are not reachable, because you don't know whether they're true or false. It also means that there are some sentences that are true and false at the same time. But if you have to find true truths in such a way that it can add clues false or falsity, right, something is either true or false. If you have an excluded middle, then this cannot be the case. So this is a very bad result, it just means that your language is not working, it gets to illegal states. It just means that the application of steps that you have prescribed in your logic, if you apply them properly, leads to an undefined result. It means that your language has seg faulting, it means your mind is breaking apart, it means that the thoughts that you're thinking no longer have meaning because they can no longer point to anything that could be implemented.

Unknown 2:02:41
Okay, so the question that I asked before was, let's imagine they intuitionist logic is correct. How does your theory change?

Unknown 2:02:50
Well, yeah, so I mean, I could easily implement the theory of conscious agents, you know, in an intuitionist logic kind of approach and run it that way. So that wouldn't really change my my theory of conscious agents fundamentally, but my own taking on this, I guess, does differ from your shows in an interesting way here and that that is I do take girdles result, not necessarily to show that the notion of continuity is is nonsense or contradictory, but rather that if I have a finite system of axioms and derivation rules, then you can look at the set of statements that can be proven by that system, then you can find statements that that are not provable within a system that says so there are undecidable from within that system. But you can what what girdle did was to to put a mapping onto the language of the system so he could write down an analogy as as Douglas Hofstadter likes to talk about you he found an analogy that he could write down where there was this new set, there was a sentence I could write down that says I am true, but not provable within the system. And that that doesn't seem to me to require me going all the way off to two uncountable infinities and continuity and so forth. It's just saying, I mean, here's the deflationary reading of girdle. This is saying, you give me any computational system, I'll find a statement that that's true, but can't be derived from within that system. Therefore, any computation that you pick isn't the final word. I don't have to go all the way to, you know, uncountable sets and so forth, I can just, I can just use that to say that the computation can't be the final truth. And so that would be sort of the minimal way out and that's what I think a lot of Researchers have interpreted girdle but but I guess he also disagrees on that.

Joscha Bach 2:05:08
Okay, well, why would it be the thing that goes beyond that? So what is the other language that you can use after good language broke?

Unknown 2:05:16
Well, what you do is you take the new statement that you showed was undecidable within that within that computational system, and you add it to your computational system, right? Every computational system has axioms, you don't compute without some assumptions. So your computation has to have certain accents to begin with. So you add it to your accent is now still a finite set of axioms. And now you say, Okay, now I'm good. Like, I took that undecidable sentence, and I put it into my set of axioms. I'm good. Now I'm done. Well, no, you're not now because girl comes back and says, You know what, I just found another statement within your new system. And that's not computable. So I'm not getting anywhere near to these uncountable infinities? No, wait, wait,

Joscha Bach 2:05:55
wait, you're making a step too far here, I think you have just found this procedure that discovers that something is true. That is not true, according to mathematics. So Google is trying to find the foundation for all of mathematics. And He does this by reducing the mathematics that he's interested in to piano arithmetic, and then computes all of mathematics and piano arithmetic and discovers that he cannot recover the semantics that he wanted to discover, which was a platonic notion of truth, one that is independent of the state sequence that he runs it through. There's this thing that you cannot recover, and you try to recover the original mathematics. By extending the axiomatic system piano's axioms, miss an infinite set a set of arbitrary statements, this doesn't seem to be very elegant. Also, of course, girdle shows that it doesn't terminate, it doesn't work. It's not fixing mathematics in any way. So the you still have the intuition here, that you have a procedure that allows you to discover truths in ways that God is procedure could not. And if you have that procedure, you should be able to prove that it's true. If you cannot prove that it's true, I'm not going to believe you don't think that the statements that you think are true, but my system cannot prove our true. Right, unless you can compute them, right. So you have to show away and that would force me as a rational observer and colleague of yours that is completely charitable trouble and so on, and reasonable and rational to follow you there. Right. So if you can give me a rational procedure, then I expect that this procedure will be computational, that it will, there will be a sequence of steps that I can follow to see why your claim that the sentence is true is actually valid. If you cannot make such a claim, I don't see how I can believe you.

Unknown 2:07:50
Well, so so the way the way I understand girdle doing it is that he you know, he comes up with this whole girdle numbering approach. And he takes you through and shows you this, this mapping from the, from the numbers into these girdle numbers that are making statements about the numbers themselves. And you look at that, and you go Yeah, okay, by while I understand that mapping, that's perfectly fine. And della can write down within that mapping, I can write down this number. And when I look at the interpretation of that number under this mapping, the the number says I am true, but not provable within piano. And so now, at this point, I sort of agree with Roger Penrose Greenwood. Penrose looks at that and says, okay, that that means that there is something true here. I can see that is true. That is I don't disbelieve, I mean, I saw the whole girdle numbering construction. I saw how the sentence came to say what it says and I agree that it's that, that it's all consistent. And what it's saying is saying that it's true and not provable. So, so So at this point, I, I guess I sort of agree with Penrose at that point. I go, okay. There's something beyond the notion of proof. Beyond the notion of derivation that does going on here. There's the looking at analogies, and understanding analogies, that where we go this this sentence is clearly true. And it's also by its own statement, its own declaration that it's not provable within within this finite computational system.

Joscha Bach 2:09:34
Penrose is fascinating. He thinks that our brains are physical systems, and he also thinks that our mental processes are generated by the brain probably, but that our brains can do mathematics that go beyond the mathematics that computers can do. That is a very specific statement that is more concrete, I think, specific than what you've said so far. And it leads him to to Viet spot Which is quite lonely at the moment. But I find is nevertheless a very interesting argument to make. I'm afraid we will not be able to resolve it today because I have to drop now. But I find it very interesting to see that you are a Penrose is that the end of the day?

Unknown 2:10:15
Well, I don't like the microtubules theory. And I don't like to the non Computer

Joscha Bach 2:10:20
Club is not really to be blamed for this. I suspect that his reasoning is that since on your own physics is computational, these basically takes the state and then there is a transition between the states the resolution for what consciousness where it comes from, if consciousness is enabling us to do things that computers cannot need to be in an unknown area of physics and the unknown area of physics, that's left reasoning and the same as Sherlock Holmes, have, you actually exclude all the possibilities? The only remaining thing must be the truth, right? That's quantum gravity, because there is no generally accepted theory of quantum gravity. And then it just so happens that Hameroff has this beautiful psychedelic theory of how to get the microtubules to have non local interactions that employ quantum gravity in a way that nobody really understands. And this might be in this corner. And so they they became friends. But I don't think that Penrose theory is exactly the same thing as Hameroff theory.

Unknown 2:11:23
Right, right. Right, and I'm not talking about that more general theory of consciousness, I'm just talking about his specific analysis of girdles Incompleteness Theorem and what it means for mathematics. Yes.

Joscha Bach 2:11:32
And it's basically also something that Chomsky is immune to in which leads Chomsky to materialism. So basically, they were confronted with the same insight or the same idea that they think that the human brains can do things that mathematics cannot, that mathematicians can make proofs that computers in principle cannot make, that they discover that certain statements are true that in an computable, axiomatic system cannot be derived. And this was also what my question was pointing up at. How do you know that something is true there? If you cannot go show me a sequence of steps, that that does it right. And so Penrose, and thinks that there must be unknown physics. And Chomsky thinks it cannot be understood in principle, which might be the same thing at the end of the day.

Unknown 2:12:23
Right, I guess we will have to go, I'll just say, our basic understanding of the axioms itself, then maybe one thing to how do I understand the basic axioms that are the foundation of the computational system? Where does that understanding come from? Is that from within the computational system? Or does that does that escape the computational system?

Joscha Bach 2:12:44
From my own perspective, it's the case that my mind is constructing a model of reality, or the reality that I find myself to be in is something like a physics engine, in which my own conscious self acts as a puppet as a simulacrum that is being used to tell the story about an intelligent agent. And I don't see any limitations in my ability to make models that could produce such an agent that would find itself in this world and associate a set of Valence percepts with a garlic and another one, the sunlight. And that happens entirely through the relational nature of my unified model of the universe that is being derived by completely non nefarious computations that are approximated in nervous systems. So I don't see a currently stand, that this doesn't work out. And I very sympathetic to when you don't see this, that it doesn't work out. And that you have to think that you have to find the tools elsewhere. And it could be that I am going to change my mind in the future when I stumble on something that basically shows to me that, or that what I'm intellectually trying doesn't work. So it's fine. It seems to work. And I appreciate that we have this difference in our perspectives, because it's a very productive and useful one to have.

Unknown 2:14:04
Absolutely, I've really appreciated the the tenor of the conversation to very much. So I would just say my last thought on this would be the, the what I would love to see from a computational system on consciousness is the associated sociation. You just talked about between the computation and say, the taste of garlic. Is it principled, or is there arbitrary, that association? If it's arbitrary,

Joscha Bach 2:14:28
it's it's not arbitrary? It's arbitrary, it is related to the valence of the taste receptors that you have. So it might be arbitrary in the sense that some people hate garlic and other people love garlic. The garlic will taste different to them, it means they will have a different experience when they taste garlic because the relations of the taste of garlic will be different to the to the entire vote motor that they have than they are to other people. So they basically the types of receptors that we have and the valence that they imply, and the type of self model that we have. So in Which way has the mind constructed itself that is entangled with its universe around it? What is that boundary? What is the set points that are marking this boundary that keeps the surf stable, this is going to shape and alter the perception. But I don't think that there is an intrinsic essence of perception beyond the relations that we established between perceptual patterns and our models of reality.

Unknown 2:15:24
So there will always be the question, why should this computational

Joscha Bach 2:15:28
process

Unknown 2:15:30
independent of Valence be the taste of scarlet? Why couldn't have been the taste of chocolate? I would want a principled answer to why is this computational process, necessarily the taste of garlic, why isn't it the taste of chocolate,

Joscha Bach 2:15:44
because one is affiliated to garlic, and the other one is associated to chocolate.

Unknown 2:15:50
But I'm talking about the conscious experience of the taste of

Joscha Bach 2:15:53
oh, well, chocolate is sweet, for the most part, and garlic is not. So this is one of the dimensions in which the features vary. And sweetness is perceived as a pleasant under some circumstances when you need certain types of nutrients. And the soreness and bitterness and darkness of garlic is associated with other things that you might need or dislike at certain moments. So the valence is crucial that you get and they are basically hundreds or 1000s, or 10s, of 1000s of Valence dimensions, that specify how we perceive this texture of the pattern, that by the resolution, the structure of the pattern, and so on is entirely given by its its relational nature of relations.

Unknown 2:16:38
So like, well, this, this is the start of a whole other

Unknown 2:16:40
one. Take care. Thank you so much.

Joscha Bach 2:16:44
Thank you, too. Good. You enjoyed this. Thank you very much.

Unknown 2:16:47
It's plenty of fun in the audience is all saying thank you as well. I think there were about 1000 people. Well,

Unknown 2:16:54
thank you very much. Great. Thanks, everyone.

Unknown 2:16:57
Thank you your show, please send me the mp3 if you don't mind. Okay, Don, I don't know if you still are recording yours. Bye bye.

Joscha Bach 2:17:04
Okay, bye. Bye. Take care.

Unknown 2:17:07
Thank you all. Thank you all. Thank you all so much for being here. It was plenty of fun. There's plenty to talk about for round two. Whenever that occurs, maybe toward the end of the summer or the middle of summer. We'll see people's willingness and ability. The podcast is now finished. If you'd like to support conversations like this, then do consider going to patreon.com/cu RTJIMUNGAL that is Kurt Jai mungall its support from the patrons and from the sponsors that allow me to do this full time. Every dollar helps tremendously. Thank you
