Joscha Bach 0:00
I think that the stories right now that we tell our children immediately to exist for our children do not depict our universe very well. They're not truthful. And they basically make our children very vulnerable to indoctrination with ideas that are not true that manipulate our children into things that are not in their best interest. And that manipulate them away from getting agency over their beliefs and ultimately their identity.

Vance Crowe 0:24
I'm Nicholas Bartlett, co owner of the world's first popcorn board game Cafe living in Fulton, Missouri, and you're listening to the Vance Crowe podcast. Welcome back to the podcast. I'm glad you're here. Today. Joscha Bach returns, longtime listeners of the podcast will remember that I had Joscha on when COVID was just kicking off. And we were talking about how he knew it was coming long before most of society had the belief that Coronavirus was a real thing, let alone that it was going to turn into a global pandemic. But this conversation was completely different than that one. We go into all kinds of things like why do people believe the things that they do? What happens if you have a child and you don't teach them the religion of their parents? Is there now a void there? Why is it that people are taking on ideas of astrology? Where did autism start to increase in society? And what implications does that have for people that are facing autism, we also got into some really amazing book reviews about some science fiction books that everyone knows about: Dune, Foundation and The Three Body Problem. And then even at the end, we had a really good conversation about some extraordinary cartoon or anime movies that parents and kids would love to watch together that are based on an entirely different premise than almost all Western movies. So sit back and enjoy. In the last couple of weeks, I've been preparing for the holiday season and doing these legacy interviews. This is where I sit down with a loved one, usually somebody a little bit older, in their late 60s, early 70s, to talk about their legacy that they're leaving behind. We talk for 60 to 90 minutes, I do them either over zoom, or if you're here in St. Louis, you can come to the studio. And we have a conversation that's worth recording and sharing with future generations. I've done dozens and dozens of these at this point. And it is an amazing experience where oftentimes people at the end will tell me, I was able to tell you stories that I've wanted to tell my wife or my children for many, many years, but it was never the right context or right never the right chance. And so they're grateful for the opportunity to have these conversations. If you're interested in learning more about these legacy interviews, go to store.articulate. ventures, and check it out and book yourself a legacy interview with me as the interviewer either for yourself or one of your loved ones. All right. Now, without further ado, let's go to our interview with Joscha Bach.

Vance Crowe 0:39
Joscha Bach! Welcome back to the podcast!

Joscha Bach 3:06
Thank you. Thank you, Vance, it's nice to see you again.

Vance Crowe 3:09
You know, last time I saw you, we were in the very beginning of COVID. And nobody really knew what it was gonna be like to live in a global pandemic, in a modern age where there's internet and, you know, giant mechanisms where you can spread information around and people can spread. Now, since that time, it still seems like the world is in a moment of chaos. And it's just very excited and and almost dangerous. Is that because that is human's perspective, it always feels this way, or is there something truly special about this moment?

Joscha Bach 3:44
I think what's special is two things. One, we have more information about the ground truth than ever because of the interconnectedness of the world. When the pandemic started, we basically had all of our private life costs of the internet, with the situation on the ground in China, if you are interested in this social media. And now we can see the failure of coordination in real time on many levels, but also the progress that is being made and the discussion that takes place in the background. So they may see many Facebook groups or WhatsApp groups and chat rooms, where you can join the fray and argue both with laypeople and with scientists or follow the situation on the ground and know about new mutations, new data, discuss the studies and so on. So basically, the circle of people who is privy to the latest developments is much, much larger than before. On the other hand, it also feels as if we are more helpless than ever before, because our coordination is not working at the same level as it was working, for instance, during the fight against smallpox or during the Spanish flu.

Vance Crowe 4:52
Why do you think that our coordination is so much less effective than in the past?

Joscha Bach 4:58
I think that's because the way our society has evolved, I suspect that when World War Two was over, and we had a mutually assured equilibrium of destruction, it meant that there was an existential threat removed from our society. And this existential threat, the sense that we could be failing has led to a different type of model for reality and has led to different form of administration. It's similar to what happens in the management of a very large company. When a company is started at first, everything that is being done is about survival. And administration will be about the survival of that company. And often the company itself will be instrumental to something outside of the company. For instance, when Google was started, it was built to give the world's knowledge to people to organize it to collect it. There were a number of moonshots programs like Google Books, and Google Earth and so on that, in a way changed the world. It was not just the search engine, because search engines already existed. And advertising was in a business model that came in after a few years and became dominant. But it was not, I think, the main thing that Google intended to do, and after Google became very large and too big to fail, and the original generation of founders have moved out of the executive positions. The incentives of Google changed. And Google is now mostly about Google, about its own microcosm, and the administration of Google is about how to get into the administration position and how to keep it. So the incentives are very different. And if you look at the world at large, then Google is not seeing itself as an organ business as well, who is I think, making a very deliberate effort to be a good citizen in the world, but it's no longer seeing itself as instrumental to organizing the world's knowledge in the best possible way, or to achieve AGI or to build orbital cities as was on the bucket list of the founders. The same thing happens in the US, right? So yes, it's not seeing itself as an instrument to go to the moon or to go to outer space anymore, or to go bring humanity into the future. It's no longer a project, it's no longer an attempt to put the Western world onto a new civilization foundation. It is something that is muddling through, and the incentives of administration also to muddle through. To get in power to stay there in a situation where nobody has a plan.

Vance Crowe 7:33
Is that in part, because we don't really have some excited vision? You know, I guess, since Elon Musk came out, and he's like, Hey, I think we should do a colony on Mars. But there was a time when it was like, hey, we want to get to the moon. And oh, no, the Russians are getting out into space ahead of us. Is it a fact that you both need a competitor and you need a vision? Or is that just an overly simplistic model to understand the past?

Joscha Bach 7:58
I suspect that when the US was founded, there was an exciting mission, there was a bunch of Freemasons and a few other power centers who sat together and decided to break free of the mother land of England, and to build their own thing and how to pull that off. So there were conspiracies, development tricks, there was the attempt to create the new world order. And later on, there were attempts to build a New American Century and so on. And these projects were sometimes fubristic and sometimes they worked out. Whenever there is something like a romantic mission, or you think you need to change the course of history to produce a certain thing like Napoleon did, then he attacked Europe. Or as Genghis Khan did. Bad things can happen. It's, it's a really terrible thing, if somebody has this mission, and the mission is succeeding in, in a way that burns down a lot of things and burns down more than it creates. But sometimes these creation events are wildfires that are creating room for something new, it just takes generations for the old stuff to come back. And I suspect that we see these wildfires in these political wildfires in many countries historically, like, for instance, Stalin in Russia, and later, the Soviet Union, or Mao and China burned down an amasing amount of culture, or also Hitler in Germany. And in a way the US hadn't had this wildfire yet. And there is a possibility that somebody with a vision comes to power and I'm a little bit afraid of that, because what happens if the US has its Mao moment or its big authoritarian vision moment, or somebody decides democracy isn't cutting it? And we feel that we are unable to coordinate within the existing democracy all the institutions are captured by local short sighted short game interests? And what can we do about this? We need to give this country shared purpose, and I need to get rid of all those that stand in the way of that. And this is something that I'm not looking forward to. But it's definitely something I think that can happen in the next couple generations.

Vance Crowe 10:13
Do you think it is an inevitable part of just human civilization?

Joscha Bach 10:19
I don't know that. I'm not sure if I believe in some kind of historic determinism, I think that human civilization is a form of evolutionary organization, there is no hard boundary between natural evolution and the socio cultural evolution of humanity. It's just something that happens and things survive or not. And sometimes you get into a point where you have an local state where you basically over graze your territory, and your population breaks down again, and you start with a lower rung, again, that can happen. And that has happened in the past. So we saw these civilizational cycles. But in part, it's also because what comes up has come down. And if society is not built explicitly for sustainability, like some, for instance, Chinese empires were, which aimed for building a stable equilibrium with limited innovation in such a way that it was not disrupting the way in which society worked, then this society is going to be more innovative, they're going to be burst, they're going to be collapses. And some of these collapses might be small, and some might be big.

Vance Crowe 11:29
Yeah, I think I've heard you say on another podcast about how making the observation that capitalism is inherently a destructive force, right? It raises things up, and then it crashes down. And I think people living like myself that have been in a capitalist system, our whole lives have almost no perception of that. It seems like it's just a natural function of the world. But to hear you say the Chinese culture in the past was thinking about sustainability. It? What do you think of that? Like, do you think that you in order to have a civilization that's sustainable, it can't be capitalistic, then because capitalism requires so much destructive innovation.

Joscha Bach 12:08
I don't think that capitalism, in essence, is an invention that somebody has created and then implemented on the world. I think that capitalism might be something like the natural organization of a technological society in the same way as feudalism might be the natural organization of an agricultural society. And an agricultural society, the primary means of production is land. And that money is something that needs to be reinvented from time to time to even out the books, because the monetary systems usually are not entirely sustainable. And the more land you control, the more power you have, and eventually the hierarchy of control, there will be a hierarchy of the control of the lands. Right? This is that this was feudalism is about. Now, agricultural production only makes up for a very small fraction of the GDP. And as a result, it's only a very small part of the power that you can wield. And so the control of the physical real estate is not on its face, the most important thing, what seems to be important is the control over technology. And the control over technology changes with the creation of new technology. So it's basically about fungibility. It's about making technology developable and tradable, and insulating the ownership over the technology and over the progress and over these new developments, to some degree from the political administration, because you want the political administration to be stable. And unlike in feudalism, where the king is also the owner of the land, and not an employee, the administrator of a democratic society is an employee, right? It's somebody who draws a salary, somebody who can be fired. And if you don't like their performance, you can fire them their various processes for that and implement the next one in a peaceful way. And the administration is beholden to rules, the administration has to play by rules that limit its action much, much more than it did for medieval rulers. So the actual freedom for the nominally most powerful people in our societies are relatively small. And maybe that's a good thing because it if you have more degrees of freedom, it creates more ways of producing mayhem. The question is, whether the incentives are still right. And the government is can be incentivized to act on the goals of our societies and our civilization.

Vance Crowe 14:35
When you look at different civilizations, like right now, you know, in our lifetime it switched from we have to worry about Russia to then I remember Japan was a big threat and now China, but when you're living within this culture, there's no way to know is the fear that I'm being told that we should have about other countries, if it's real, or if it's some form of like government propaganda or, you know, some sort of way to try and get the population to do things when you look out at the world, do you think a US citizen should have that that view of that's a culture or a country we should be afraid of? Or is that a nonsensical way to look at the world?

Joscha Bach 15:16
I think as an individual, and looking at global history, it makes sense not to have that many emotions. Because there is this emotional investment, it's very similar to the emotional investment that people have into a wrestling match. It has no result, no effect on the outcome of that wrestling match, right, it creates an individual investment. And so in some sense, it's a form of entertainment, that is moving people's emotions and creates connection between them. But the decisions that are being made are largely not being made, because people have thought about these issues deeply on the lower levels. And it's more interesting to see who is creating that emotion. Because public opinion is very pliable, it's people tend to be biased by what their friends think. And if you can influence what other people think about what other people think you have much greater influence about what people think then by bringing out arguments about the ground truths. So basically, the control of public opinion, by telling people what everybody thinks it is, this seems to be more important than telling people want the truth is. And so there's a disconnect between what people are afraid of and what's actually happening. And there is a disconnect between what you can personally do to influence your destiny in this world, versus what you think the world is doing. And so in some sense, the important question is, what can you hear, to hear right now, this moment, and you can play a very, very long game with this, and this game can involve very many people. But there's always only this moment, that is not the tool by which you can put a lever into the view of history and gradually shifted at a global scale, you can only do this with individual actions that influence individual people, individual systems, and individual acts that people are doing. That said, I think that the public opinion is reflecting the course that society is taking. So if a society is at some level, preparing for war, which means that the different players in society are gradually agreeing or suddenly agreeing that there is a conflict on the horizon, then there will be efforts to shift public opinion in this way or that way. And we can measure that and see it. But in my perspective, the majority of people is not an agent in this. They have very little agency over their beliefs. And so it's more like a temperature that you can take over the public opinion.

Vance Crowe 17:53
That's a fascinating turn of phrase, they have very little agency over their beliefs, say more about that.

Joscha Bach 18:01
agency over your beliefs means that first of all, you need to understand epistemology, which is this word that philosophers use when they discuss what you can know, and what criteria for tools are. And if we take for example, something like say telepathy hypothesis is a good example for epistemology. So the epistemology means, in my view, that the confidence that you should have about something being true should equal the weight of the evidence. But everything that is not impossible is possible. And you have to remain agnostic about all the things that are possible. But you have to also adjust the confidence in that space. So not everything that is possible, deserves the same degree of confidence. That also means if somebody makes a claim, and has no evidence to present for that claim, then you don't need necessarily to have confidence in that claim. And if that other one cannot have evidence for that claim. So for instance, say, was Jesus born by a virgin? How would you know? Have you talked to her gynecologist? Are there any reliable sources and so on? Are there people who could have had reliable sources on this? Or was it always the case that there were people who were personally involved and might have had an invested interest for people to see it one way or the other for other reasons, right? So there might be cultural reasons to adhere to a certain narrative because if you have a non random belief that not a normal reasonable person would have and you share this belief with your friends, maybe it markes you as one of your friends. So it becomes like a branding iron on your intellect by which everybody can recognize that you are one of the good ones, because you believe in something that is on on the face of things extremely unlikely. Is this something that is epistemologically unsound, so violations of epistemology are often the mark that distinguishes people within a movement or an ideology or religion, and it's desirable, sometimes if people build a religion to put these marks on on the minds of the members, so you can recognize them that they believe non random, non rational things. For the Lab Leak hypothesis, to take this as an example, initially, when you see that a virus breaks out, you know that the type of this virus has been broken out from labs in the past, there is a possibility that this happens. So it's not very hard to rule it out. And when you see that, the virus of the same type, it has been researched on a lab emerges in a big city, in very physically close proximity to that lab that increases the possibility that this happens. And if you learn that the people in this lab worked on animals, and did variations, study variations of viruses on animals, especially bats, right, this suddenly increases the probability to such a degree that you might think that, okay, out of all places in the world, the lab that might be foremost in the world and studying this type of disease and was built after the first SARS breakout, to study exactly this kind of disease is very close to where this happened. Now, this becomes the null hypothesis, right? It shouldn't be the null hypothesis unless you have an extremely good insight, reason, or good argument that you have reason to trust that speaks against that. And then you start seeing lots of interested people. So you see people which want this to be something that has been broken from the lab and was actually engineered, possibly as a bio weapon to harm the world or to harm specifically to US or whatever. See, quickly goes into motivated reasoning, that basically just because something fits into your preferred view of the world of its agency of its moral outlook, and so on, you think it should be this way or the other way, you see the counter argument that people who have this particular bad view of the world are the ones who are arguing for the possibility of a Lab Leak therefore, that cannot have happened and it must have been a zoonotic biological, random origin. That is equally suspicious, right? As soon as you see players making arguments, based out of the attempt to sway public opinion one way or the other, because it fits into a certain narrative, you should be suspicious, right? So you should try to identify the likely biases that people have, and try to correct for those biases. And this means more, be more open to dismiss arguments that might be the result of such a bias and basically try to find the subset of the opinions that is compatible with all the data and focus your exploration on this set.

Vance Crowe 22:59
You know, this is something that you talked about in your My favorite talk that I've seen that you give is the computational meta psychology. And you were talking about how it was evolutionarily advantageous not necessarily to think the the correct thing, the right thing, but actually to think the normative thing, what is it that everybody else believes, because to not believe what everybody else believes could make you an outcast in a tribal society, or in an area where if you get pushed out of the group, you'd have to live completely on your own. It strikes me when I was reading Rene Girard about mimetic desire, that his thoughts on the fact that like human beings don't know what to want. In fact, if you just put a human being out in the world, like a small child, it's really not possible for them to want things other than maybe their biological needs. Do you take that that normative belief to be the similar to Rene Gerards mimetic desire concept.

Joscha Bach 23:58
I suspect that for us, the thing that distinguishes us from other primates is our programmability. It's not that we are smarter than the Neanderthals, but that our society scales up in ways that Dinanath our society didn't know that tribal societies didn't. And this enables us to interact coherently with people that he never met. He basically identify strangers as having certain rules is following a certain type of beliefs. And this allows us to interact consistently Miss miss them, even though we don't know them. And it's a fascinating thing that you suddenly get a society that is almost infinitely scalable, doesn't really matter, once you have this type of organization, whether you have hundreds of 1000s or millions of individuals, because you can certainly interact with all of them, according to a certain set of beliefs and tribe doesn't scale up in the same way. And I suspect that this, these changes that had had to happen, had to do with us be more interested in understanding what other people believe to be true than what's actually true. In our own life, it's more important generally to know what our boss thinks, but our peers things, but the relationships that we have think about the world and us, then about what's actually true, because what's actually true is something that is explored in the lab behind closed doors at some kind of frontier that really affects what you're doing. And the common beliefs are a good enough approximation for what's actually true. And it's, it gets interesting when there is a deviation between the common beliefs and what's actually true.

Vance Crowe 25:37
Yep, particularly on things like, you know, a lab leak hypothesis or our vaccine safe or not, like as those start as you start deviating from there. And then deviation causes real rifts in society, to the degree that people believe they can even live alongside one another anymore.

Joscha Bach 25:54
Yes. And this issue is also one, that people are not just good as a cooperation, we are very good at the cooperation. But people have also evolved for conflict between groups. And we are not just cooperative species, we are a species that is in competition with itself. And this competition actually doesn't happen so much between individuals, because this doesn't get you very far. We are a state building species, it happens between groups that want to be a state, and wants to have a shared harmonic belief at the very large scale. And if you can create a rift between people in this way, then you can split off your own space set in a way. And that's also what we have seen happening on social media, social media has been open so far, for to a very large degree, it means that every set of ideas that wanted to evolve, could insert to capture people captured the beliefs of people, and spread through them. And it's very interesting to see that once you create such an opportunity for the emergence of St. cuts, then pals will emerge, and then they will, of course, become more agentic. And we'll start shutting down the possibility for newcomers, to compete with them. And so we now see a movement to shut down the freedom of social media for opinions that compete with the opinions that have emerged in social media are novel, right? We have a set of backbiting shared beliefs, very strongly held beliefs that didn't exist 20 years ago, and never existed in human history ever, despite people basically being about as smart as they are today, at least. Right. And these beliefs are not cannot be questioned. They and this is a very interesting thing when that belief cannot be questioned. For instance, if you see people with yard signs, I believe in science, they don't express that they believe in the possibility that everything can be systematically criticized. It just means that New England Protestantism has entered a new face.

Vance Crowe 28:01
Oh, that is fascinating. There's a guy named Zack Stein that refers to these as self terminating cliches, right? They're, they're a form of ideology, because the statement in and of itself is designed to make it so we don't continue the conversation anymore. Well, in this house, we believe in science or, you know, I there was a large sign over the, our door coming into my house, this house believes in the Lord, right, like those are self terminating cliches,

Joscha Bach 28:28
yes. But let's not turn this into meat intermediately into something normative, there is something good about this topic, stop this, right. So let's, let's not start out is the attempt to say whether this is good or bad, it's very hard to build your own value from scratch. And to be truthful in everything, right. In order to understand the world, you need to build on the knowledge of others. You need to build on intellectual and also ethical traditions, because it's very hard to prove them from first principles. As an individual, as I have learned in the course of my life. In some sense, that's what I had to try to do. Because I grew up in communist Eastern Germany, which didn't make a lot of sense to me. And while I had the news of Eastern Germany, in the news of Western Germany, every evening on TV, none of them appear to be true. And you have to pick from them you have to pick from what your teachers are saying from the books that you find in your library are saying, you have to identify what's true. And it's very hard to get very far if you do this all by yourself. So how do you find the tools for tradition? And the other one is when you want to act, you cannot act alone, you need to act together with others with whom you coordinate. So how do you find the right group the right hive mind to link up to and to interact this? And while it is in some sense, disgusting to me, if people are privileging the opinion of the group over their own insight about what's true. It is also something that is very powerful, especially if you realize that you as an individual don't have a very good chance of discovering the ground truths and of discover of building a new group that is acting on this shared understanding of what that word world really is. So this idea of that we believe in the Lord or that you believe in Jesus Christ means people live in a certain mode of interaction, you believe in certain institutions that synchronize our beliefs, we believe in certain values that shape these groups, and we believe in together with the school building a civilization, because this is the group that our lawyer utilizes, and we don't see a better alternative. Realistically, right? The the same thing is true for the people who believe in science will basically believe in Ivy League science, they believe in priests that are Harvard ordained, and it's not necessarily a bad thing, but it's not that easy to get that sacrament. And if you see, look at the available sacraments, it's not one of the worst ones,

Vance Crowe 30:50
you know, as I've heard you in the past describe, you know, the disgustingness, of having giving over groupthink, you know, instead of your own personal beliefs, but then you're also relatively kind to religions, right? You just kind of said, Hey, there's a reason why you would want to do this. If you decide that you're going to have children, and you grew up in a Christian tradition, but then decide I'm not going to download that software onto my children, because I think it has all these drawbacks. Does that create a void in the child's mind? Or does that create, you know, an opening where some other thing is going to get poured in there because there must be software to run the program of the of the child. So if you opt not to use the one of your past, and you don't download a different one, what happens there.

Joscha Bach 31:40
And I look around among the people that I met, that basically had a problem in the intellect that was downloaded on them. So the previous generation, when this break happens, you start at the lower level, I suspect, except when the hive mind of your parents was very dysfunctional to begin with, and no longer tracking reality outside. So there is this difficulty that many of the traditional hive minds for instance, the religious hive minds, have not been able very well to track reality. And especially because most of the religions Use a degree of superstition to indoctrinate people with them as ology, and to install the right modes of interaction on them. And the superstition is incompatible with a scientific worldview, or is the rational tools that people need to succeed in capitalism, and to achieve social mobility and so on. So there is is a way to make this compatible, but it's very hard. And in an agricultural society, it doesn't matter so much, because the technological progress is not as robust and pronounced and doesn't play a big role. So you want to have rationality in your local interactions, but you don't need to have extremely rational opinions about how government works at scale, or how the logic works, or how mathematics works, or how the scientific method works, right. And this has changed in a way, if you now want to, for instance, earn money on the stock market, you need to understand what money is, at some level, you need to understand how it's been created or destroyed, or the interaction spur this money in society, at least to some degree. And so super nice beliefs that exists as a tool to gloss over the inconsistencies in the construction of our social systems are now detrimental to your success in our society. But individually, I find that people get confused. Yes, there is, for instance, intuitions that we need to have about the economic Yukimi of social interactions. Why do people do what they do. And these interactions are these biases lead us to sometimes better models of reality, because we can jumpstart the formation of all models. It's basically similar to architecture search, in machine learning, machine learning, you have two issues, one is to converge, which means we have a neural network with so many layers and so on so many parameters. And then you do statistics over the data and map the statistics into the structure. And that is about some process of convergence. And the other end, how do you find the architecture? How do you find the algorithms? How do you find the set of parameters that you need to use? What is the resolution of these parameters? How are these parameters interconnected into a larger structure? And this is the difficult thing to get right? And the structure of your whole beliefs, the hierarchy of things. So the basic patterns of interaction. And when we look at the social interaction of people we are born typically this priors of how social interaction works. And these priors are different in different people, and they determine the speed of the progress that we can make in a given society. And these priors seem to be of different success depending on the society that we find ourselves to be in, which means that we are born for certain parts Is that evolved in a given societal framework over centuries or millennia. So I suspect that people that are alive today have a very different set of beliefs when they are born with that they are born with biases to form certain beliefs that are born with that people did have 100,000 years ago.

Vance Crowe 35:20
You mean that literally born with you mean like not a blank slate they are there, it's encoded into their genetics in some way.

Joscha Bach 35:28
I noticed this in my cat, my cat has, is not very smart cat is pretty simple minded. For instance, the cat is not that good in spatial cognition, if the cat gets caught up in the wire, the cat has difficulty to figure out how to remove herself from this wire in a way that I think is three year old child would easily understand. So spatial cognition of cats, despite their amazing abilities to move in space, is not as sophisticated as visiting people. And in part, I think that cats are so good at moving their bodies because they are faster doing spatial cognition, which means that would have less steps to some degree. And the same thing is true for social cognition they get at the age of one year, as a better understanding of how things work and my family, then my kids had at the age of three. And that's, I think, because the cat is born, the sound priors that are expressed in the board online relatively quickly. And these priors are quite sophisticated. For instance, they get figured out and experimented how far she can go with playing with every one of us. So she knows that my son doesn't want to be bitten, because he is a little bit afraid of of that. But it's okay to bite my daughter and meet you in play. But also how much until it becomes unpleasant and you fight back or tell her that it's worse, and so on. And the cat is relatively fine tune that. The cat also is a result of a particular line of cats that had long tradition of being outdoors and feral before it was taken in again. And so this cat doesn't want to drink standing water. For some reason, the cat has never drank anything from a cup that he put down for over a bowl, even when she was thirsty. And she had indigestion because of this and constipation. And then we noticed that she was drinking from the faucet and we gave her a court phone and she was always is now always drinking from the cat founded. So avoid needs to be running. Right? This is an evolutionary thing that probably made sense for some of our ancestors in the last few 100 years. And the cat also has hardcoded to give you a Wendy she's playing. So if a toy looks like a bird, she expects that bird like Toy when she approaches it to flutter away into the air, but resisted when the toy looks like a rodent. Then it's she expected to scuttle away. And she has never hunted out in nature. So she hasn't learned this out in nature. But if you get it wrong, if the bird is scattering away, or if the mouse is flying away, she's upset and annoyed and walks away that was meant to play anymore because we're doing it wrong. It's these are very sophisticated behaviors you see all do the same thing in dogs. A dachshund is a dog that is specific bred to want to go into dark tunnels and to look after dangerous animals that could be dangerous to this dog even and drag them out of these tunnels and other dogs don't do that. Right? Other dogs might want to shepherd and then they for the first time and then I forget to put clothes even if they grew up in a city to a herd of sheep, they might fall into shepherding behavior, which is quite specific. So how is that happening? Right? And it's happens because they have been selected for this in the process of directed evolution where people have read these dogs for very particular purposes. And civilization depends on very specific groups of people doing very specific things.

Joscha Bach 39:00
Right, this is what happens in an agricultural society, you need 1000s or 10s of 1000s of people that specialize on doing warfare or they're specialized on doing agriculture specialize in doing administration. And these people get bred for that purpose, you will have more success if you are good in this particular kind of job. And as a result, sometimes you keep children a little bit also you better have this job and you will help the family business to them and so on. And as long as society is stable, and as long as resources in society are scars and children can still starve. If your society is not successful, or your family witness society is not successful. We will breed people for particular kinds of purposes. And so in pre modern times, people were selected for being religious and people were selected for being compliant with agriculture and so on I suspect and these specifications as we can see in the domestic animals that we have change were relatively quickly, I also don't think that they are something that determines your individual destiny. Because they address reflexes, they address biases that make behavior of one way or the other slightly more likely. And this means that you are more likely to learn a certain thing more quickly. But you can also unlearn them. And as soon as you learn the true nature of things, so not your biases, but you learn how things actually work. And for what reason, you have an actual causal model of reality, these reflexes are turned off. So it doesn't really matter. What whether you're, I think, born as a tribal person, or as a person, that is the result of a Christian society that has existed in this religious mode for a few 1000 years, and has already created all the riches. But you can still learn these things if you have opportunity to learn them. And if you can build the right layers into your mind, and change your architecture. And this is one of the great powers of humans that they can reprogram themselves. So we're not only programmable, you can also get agency of our own programming to a large degree, we can make up and get to the next level of understanding. This is what the psychologist Robert Keegan has described in his stages of personality development. And what he roughly describes is that at stage three, we form our beliefs based on the environment and also think based on innate priors of what we expect our environment to do. For instance, whether you think it's more important to follow the beliefs of others than your own beliefs is something like an innate prior, it's a decision that your own mind needs to make, or to be influenceable by your environment, you need to be ready to be influenced. And this leads us back to this earlier question. What happens if you don't interact, donate your child isn't somebody else going to indoctrinate them. And that depends on the child, right depends on the inner decision of the mind of the child. It's not at this point, the child has agency over this, because the child has no way to decide whether it's better to take in the beliefs of others, or whether to reject and pretty fold and build its own beliefs. So you will find some children that are by nature, quite obstinate and stubborn, and will dismiss the opinions of the teachers and parents more readily than others. And you have others that will be uncomfortable developing their own ideas. And first of all want to understand what the teacher is saying to be true and will want to take this in as their own null hypothesis. And then want to have very strong evidence before the deviate from the socially acquired null hypothesis. At stage four is when you discover epistemology, you realize something is to independently of other thing, and independently also in the opposite, right? If somebody else doesn't like something, believe something to be true, right? 10 doesn't necessarily mean that the opposite is true. What's true is basically independent of other people's beliefs, it also only depend on the evidence, and that other people think something to be true is evidence that it worked for them for some reason, which might be because it's true. But you should take into account that it might also be false. And if you can construct your own beliefs in this way, and can evaluate your beliefs freely, and you're no longer beholden to these biases, that something is true, because you have an emotional attachment to the outcome, then you get agency over your beliefs.

Vance Crowe 43:23
I think a lot about the, you know, when somebody's downloading beliefs, because when my daughter violet, when we were going to have, like a regular babysitter and nanny come into our house, we interviewed a whole bunch of them. And it would almost always come up at first by them. But then I started asking that they believe in astrology. And it began like at first kind of just a joke between me and my wife that a couple of people mentioned it, and then several, and then basically every person we've met with and now I go out and give talks, and I'll ask rooms of people, how many of you, you know, really are curious about astrology or interact with it and you'll see all these women from whatever 18 up to 35 raise their hand and then a really sharp cut off right above that mark. And I think like this must be some cultural movement, that it's okay for people to for these women to believe it It must be some social thing that allows them to communicate with one another. But it just strikes me as something that is a very interesting phenomenon, particularly because all these people live in the city and they can't even see the stars, let alone let alone interpret their meaning.

Joscha Bach 44:33
The issue is that to disprove astrology, you need to use entirely analytical rational thinking, your perceptual system, your emotions, your feeling can not by themselves disprove astrology, because it needs first principles thinking. So if somebody gives you social proof or astrology, if they tell you it has worked very well for me and my friends, and then you get a few stories about this. And you also make a few experiments and some of them might work out for you, maybe sometimes your scope comes through, but how you can you disprove it, you need some kind of first principles thinking to do that. And this analytic first principles thinking mode is very brittle it by and large doesn't work very well. And you use this mode to try to figure out purely analytical thinking that you make lists and arguments that are true or false about whether you should marry this person or not, it's probably not going to work out right. Advantages and disadvantages of entering a relationship with this person, it might help you to create your feelings, but ultimately, you need to trust your gut. And your gut means it's the non analytical mode of your thinking. It's distributed neural network that you cannot fully introspect that is trained on reality. But that is an it's not just doing first principles thinking. But it is able to edit with very subtle things that you can not analyze this applying grammatical rules onto a symbolic structure as we do in logical thinking. Right. So if you need to make important decisions about the world, you need to get out of the analytical mode sometimes, except in those areas where your emotions are not reliable, your feelings are not reliable. So rational thinking is a tool to deal with your darkest emotions versus those that are hidden, that are unclear that are murky. This is where you need to step in and take things apart and pry them apart until you have a clear feeling about it until the system that directs your actions gives you a clear answer, and you'll see why it gives you that answer. But for the most part, you will not have a model that is operating at that level of detail. With respect to astrology itself, the superstition that is inherent in it is to get data that supports it astrology is working is not that hard. It's much harder to get data that conclusively shows that it doesn't. Because this means that you need to have enormous amount of statistics. And when I was young, I looked at astrology. And I thought this is very unlikely to be true, but I couldn't put my finger on it why it wasn't because there was such an elaborate saints, you had formulas that would allow you to calculate in your books about this, from your exact lecture, the attitude and longitude and date of birth are very particular things your life would play out. So the more effort you would be making, the more knowledge you would be incorporating, the more books you would be reading about as more and more authorities you were studying, the more you will be able to do is this right? And how is that not the scientific method. And it took a while before it struck me that none of these astrologers who had written these books could have collected data, they could not know the ground rules, they could not possibly have established the relationship between the formulas and these life events. What kind of message record date could I if I wasn't astrologer used to establish that my formula is true, I would need to look at the destinies of millions of people. And back then many of these books were written, the candidates were different. And the quality relations were different. And people that live very different, very different lives. And they were also a very different kind of society, and much, much fewer people, or they were only millions of people in our society and not billions on the world. And so how is this still the same? How? How could they have done these experiments and so on, so they never had the case. And to understand that was very hard for me to get to all these steps. And the opposite is super easy. Francois actually has vile go shed dog on Twitter. And it wasn't a joke that you wrote, it was just something that we retweeted. It was a video of a young, very confident psychologist. interrogating her audience, I think it was a tick tock asking her to imagine certain numbers, doing a set of equations in their mind and then imagine a vegetable. And then she held up a carrot. And most people thought they were completely mind blown, because they saw that as she implied that the sequence of thoughts that were completely unrelated to vegetables and carrots, and prompt them to think about carrots. But if you take a random group of Americans, and you ask them to think of a random vegetable, maybe 40% will think carrot and this 40% will be completely blown away by the stick talk and share it and you don't need 100 or 80% of the people to be convinced that your theory is good.

Joscha Bach 49:35
1% have a very large audience that the completely unlikely theory works super well for them right, then they are going to be paying your bills and a lot of snake oil works in this vein. So you and a lot of psychics practice where you make an extremely detailed prediction, and if 80% of your audience they may and walk away that's fine as long as 20% are completely blown away, and this is how astrology works. But counter argument for astrology, I think the best one that I've seen so far was, we would think that as follows, you should at least predict relationship success to some degree, right this, who is matching with whom this means that there should be a deviation in the statistics of how people find together based on their psychological science. And, I mean, it's, it's not unreasonable to think that there is because maybe people born in March are different from people born in September, because they go through seasons at different ages. And most importantly, when they are in school, they interact with children at a different cutoff date. Right. So if you are the youngest in your class, which is related to the month in which you're born, you're much more likely to be diagnosed with ADHD, if you're the oldest in your class, you're more likely to be dominant in your class. And as a result, you will earn more money, because you will more likely be promoted in leadership position later on in your life. And you can solve these statistical effects. So there is such a correlation between your data and birth. That is caused by the school system and the cutoff dates in the school system. You can control that, but for relationship success, it doesn't exist. So when OKCupid did statistics over the birth dates of people and the millions of people in the database and their matching success, you see that it's completely flat. There's it's absolutely equally distributed. So there is zero correlation, this very high confidence between relationships, ship success, and your zodiac sign.

Vance Crowe 51:42
You talked about kids getting diagnosed with things like ADHD, and this brought to mind for me the number of kids that get diagnosed with autism. I'm in my 40s, I now have a bunch of friends that have young kids, and several of them have have said, Oh, my, my children have autism. I don't like this seems like a simplistic question. But I don't remember this many children having autism, when I was growing up is this a matter of autism is actually increasing. Or what we're diagnosing is is more autism. And the reason I asked you is because I think you have an interesting insight into the the minds of people. And I think most people don't even really have a concept for what autism is, if somebody were to say your child has autism, they really don't know what that means other than they, you know, they they really need things to be patterned or something.

Joscha Bach 52:34
Yeah, I also found that when I looked at children, my own children and children are friends, and that diagnostics, quite criteria that they're being subjected to, they're not always that helpful. It's more interesting to think what's particularly going on with this particular child, then to see where the DSM category fits. And this determines the treatment. The with respect to your question, I think both happens. So we have more diagnostic criteria when I was young, then autism, or Asperger's was just discovered as a possible diagnosis. And ADHD also was not something that was frequently diagnosed, it was just something was there was not so much on the radar. Autism did exist, but it was mostly applied to more severe cases. But there was a few cases have also increased. So it's not just that autism gets more diagnosed more readily. But children with learning disabilities, it was difficulty to focus with more increased spells of dissociation, is difficulty to develop intuitive empathy, and so on. This seems to be on the rise and the severe cases of autism. So not Asperger's. But people who are unable to learn to speak, that cannot walk properly, that cannot control the emotions at all, and might be crying at other people or biting them or themselves and hurt themselves in the process. And so that is a really dysfunctional, this is also increased. And I think that autism first of all is an developmental defect, it means that your nervous system is not forming in the right way. And developmental defects are caused either by genetics, which means that there is some problem in your genetic code that is not being weeded out genetic drift mutations that accumulate randomly over generations in which your child mortality is decreasing, which means you no longer selecting for defects. And the other thing is that environmental influences can interact with your development. And we don't in the US have a strong precautionary principle for chemicals. Basically, if something doesn't kill the rats in three months, it's fine and unless you find a good reason to believe that it's not an if there is something that is by itself not toxic, but it's just disrupting signaling processes during development, very subtle chemical signals that tell cells in your brain, what type of cell they should be, and what mode they should be in, depending on the proximity to certain other points in the brain, that secrete certain chemicals and interact with them. And these individual cells are locally measuring this chemical gradient. This is how the different cells know where they are in the brain. And what kind of cell this would differentiate on right. And these effects are, if they interact with chemicals, for instance, in your foot or in your water, or in your clothing, or in your furniture, then it's very difficult to detect these effects in a rat experiment. Because they are going to be different for every species. And in humans, they play out over a long time, you basically need to look over an entire generation, on how the effect will be before you know of a certainty. And this is something that is very deeply concerning to me. So if we have in after we change the chemical composition of our food and allow a number of new chemicals in our food, this is the single generation. And isn't that generation, we see a lot of increase of developmental defects and very concerned, especially since we don't have any coordination to get rid of that.

Vance Crowe 56:26
They I am. I'm really glad I asked you this, because I'm very surprised by that you're one of the only people in the scientific community I've ever met that said, Hey, I think it could be something in our food, or the clothing that we're wearing could be doused with some kind of chemical, it's, this has to be something that I mean, in in the world that I live in. Not many scientific people think this way would put you pretty far outside of that little, you know, enclave?

Joscha Bach 56:54
Oh, I don't think so I suspect that most people that I'm talking to the Be aware of the fact that for instance, estrogen in their drinking water, since we introduced the pill is an issue by the estrogen that are being used as a contraceptive. And that is not completely filtered out in water treatment is visibly affecting fish and female animals in environment. So we see this effect. And it's probably also affecting people made if you give everybody estrogen even if it's low dose estrogen, during their development in utero. And as babies and as children, it's going to have a slight effect on their bodies. And the same is true for substances and our food and food chain that are mimicking hormones. That is messaging, messaging, Jamie chemicals, for instance, tablets have the property that they can interact with some of the receptors that are being used by hormones in our own body, and as a result, give signaling to how our bodies should develop. And the same is also true for not just that, but probably also for soy. So a lot of soy products that get into our food chain might interact at some subtle level with our signaling.

Vance Crowe 58:20
And so if this were if this, what is the human do, right that if it's in your food or in your water, I can remember living in, in Africa, and there was a time when we thought aflatoxin was in the corn and like corn was everything you ate, right? It was like the primary, you get ate and paste called ugali. And when you start to have a fear that something is poisonous in the food, even in low doses, it clouds your every thought like basically everything you're thinking and doing all day every day swirls around the idea that you may be being poisoned. So if this is what you're thinking about, is this cloud all of your thoughts, or Was I being hyperbolic? No.

Joscha Bach 59:01
I'm not trying to think about it that much. I'm trying to mostly eat the things that I think my ancestors ate. I suspect that people can visit a few generations get be fine with most food sources. Also, there's a lot of toxins in food, because we can just evolve to deal with these toxins, but it will be at the expense of child mortality, right? Because the only way that something gets into the next generation is that it mutates into the next generation. Most mutations are not in the right direction. So, throughout human history, there has been a selection for new traits. The reason why we have new generations is adaptation, because the individual organism cannot adapt very much the individual organism can converge to something that has already been built into it by evolution. So a certain range of things that you can adapt to, but it can usually not adapt to completely new food sources very well. And if you want to have something that is known the materials, you need to stay with this for a few generations and allow mutation and selection. And of course, we all agree we don't want to have selection. We don't want to die in childhood, or we don't want our children to die. So how can can we achieve that I don't really know, solution to this, we can do a few things. There's pre implantation diagnostics. So we can filter out deleterious mutations that we already know that they're not good ones. But it's difficult to use something like pre implantation diagnostics, to select for benevolent mutations, because we don't know how they will play out. So it's very difficult for us to breed a new generation that is able to deal with new food sources. And so my tendency would be to be for myself relatively conservative with foot, I would want to eat similar foods as works for my ancestors. And if I try new food, I would want to monitor how I feel interacted with my own body. On at scale that extract data we can do, because we have certain food that is very cheap to produce at any given time, if enormous amount of people, you probably cannot change agricultural food production back to the state that was in 100 years ago, and still feed feed people comfortably. So we have to deal with the fact somehow that our food is no different.

Vance Crowe 1:01:18
You know, when we were talking before about autism and Asperger's, and you talk about mutations, or like this is a like a mental defect. The several friends that I have that have Asperger's it is it's made them extraordinary, in some ways, like certainly, they're the little bit difficult to get along with sometimes, or they have some quirks. But, but that trait, combined with high IQ has made them capable of doing things or paying attention to things that most normies couldn't even come close to,

Joscha Bach 1:01:47
yes, but I suspect that the majority of people on the spectrum do not develop superpowers. So on average, I suspect the they are less employable. And the people that you become aware of people like Mark Zuckerberg, they are the outliers, right? So there is a selection bias you will have among your friends, mostly those that are super functional, that have local superpowers, typically at the expense of something else. And I think when you have high functioning autism, Asperger's, and you have difficulty to make models that are very deep, which is often the case. So one of the problems that I seem to be seeing often and people that are on the autism spectrum, is that they, they seems to be an issue with signal propagation. Which means that the signals in your brain do not go very deeply over too many layers. It's as if they are operating on a higher frequency, so their looks are shorter. And as a result, they need to integrate over fewer layers. And as a compensation, their brain will increase the degree to which they can discover patterns on the previous layer. So these people are often down in the weeds, they might not see the big picture very easily. But they're very, very good at dealing with the small picture. And computers are all about the small picture. Computers are a cabinet for many people with Asperger's, because the world of the computer is essentially flat, it's not deep, everything is scripted, everything is conceptual. It's all on the same level, it's the opposite of art, for art, you need to look very deep, right, you make this connection between what's meaningful to you, and what you perceive on the lowest level. And you go very, very deep, you see the significance of things. And there are also people which are very deep into art, often Sunni states and so on, are probably also on the spectrum just in the other direction. Right. So when we think of autism, we will mostly think of people that are very literal, that have sensory overflow issues are because they have difficulty to single out stable features from the layers that they are observing. And stability requires that you integrate over many layers. And you have on the other hand people that are in permanently holy mode that see everything is extremely significant, even the smallest test mode in the sky. And that also not getting anything done for different reasons, right. And this might be part of the same spectrum in a way where the speed or the onto the depth of signal transmission in the perceptual system is affected. And I suspected for ADHD, a similar thing happens not for perceptual signals, but it happens for control signals. So people with ADHD tend to be very impulsive, which means they have difficulty to interact on the long games on long game reward. They often can think long term, but they're often not able to act on the long term impulses because the short term impulses take over. It's basically as if there's a hierarchy of functions of purposes, that determines your behavior. And only the purposes that give immediate reward can affect the behavior. Whereas the purposes that affect the long game cannot become effective, which leads to enormous frustration for these individuals, because they know better at some level, they just don't find that the act on the understanding of the world.

Vance Crowe 1:05:23
Why is there a difference between those two? Why is it that the human mind isn't just in control of itself? Like, why can't I just say, I'm going to eat healthy, and then therefore every one of my decisions already be made.

Joscha Bach 1:05:36
But I think if you don't have any trace of ADHD, you will be in charge of that, because it means that your behavior is going to be directed by your longest game. And if you build such a model, it also means that you have to have an effective model of the future very deeply. And these effective models of the future is tend to be very sparse and brittle. Because the world is branching a lot. And if the world is changing a lot, you cannot reliably sink very, very far ahead. So you should have a balance between the narrative models that go very far into the future that are typically analytical models, and the immediate models of what you want to do in the next hour, or what, what do you want to do with the next week, and what you want to do in the next month, and so on. And you should prioritize, to some degree, the stuff that happens right now, and to reap rewards right now, rather than just acting on extremely long games. So you should be able to discount things that are very far in the future, even if you don't know the possibilities, just because so much is happening. If you think about science fiction, which by the way, is very young read science fiction, literature only exists since you have technology. There was no real science fiction in the medieval ages. It was not much before to earn and so on. And there was no science fiction for the Greeks. And that's because their society was largely stable, they did not expect completely new types of technology to emerge and completely trance figure the way in which their societies work. And the science fiction that we find in our literature is typically extrapolating based on known technologies that are scaled into the future very hard and to see to which face change this would lead so the obvious thing is you develop spaceships or you develop satellites, and you scale this up into settling other planets. And then you combine this with what you already know about how settlement and pioneering and then you have Space Force and space empires and all these things that get separated from this right. That's,

Vance Crowe 1:07:43
that's foundation. That's that's all of them. Yeah, Euro Foundation

Joscha Bach 1:07:47
are super interesting, because they are taking a different perspective. In foundation, I think, if you take the books, they you have a world in which there is continuous technological progress, there is going to be always the next thing that is going to change everything. At the same time, you have a very weird kind of mathematics that is not intelligible. There is basically a hidden pattern that very seldom is discovering of reality. And this hidden pattern is something that you cannot see me I cannot see. But every surgeon can do it with this arcane mathematics that allows him to see how things are going to be at scale despite the new technology being developed, right. So this, this deeper thinking is somehow able to account for these technological developments in the way in which novel thinking is not despite these inventions, not having been made. And I think this is superstitious, right for Asimov thinking in foundation is fundamentally superstitious. Also Foundation is a very simple premise. The simple principle which is scaled up here is that humanity will settle the Galaxy while resile remaining human, right. So there will still be naked monkeys that care about how much sugar they eat, and they smoke pipes. They are sexist in stereotypical ways of the 50s, and especially Asimov himself, right there. gender relations are really archaic in this particular way of this very, very particular era. He is only scared of this dimension, we are going to settle the galaxy and we are going to go into a stable empire. And what would be if we could predict the future of empires mathematically. And then he scales this idea, right? So if he could do this, we could see when this empire cycle is going to end and why. And we could predict how it's going to play out and we could predict bifurcations if we could take to make sure that the course of history is going to be changed. And then we tell a bunch of relatively naive and boring stories, visit that universe and explore single ideas in that universe. And then he explores some extremes. So he explores an extreme and human aesthetics but I If made evolves and do you have a planet where people telepathically share all the ideas and intentions aren't aren't this result as a result are in some see my enlightened state. And on the other hand, you have individuals that do the opposite that became come complete Singleton's and no longer interact. And single individual is going to whole an entire continent. And it's interacting with the other individuals and other continents. And both of these extremes exists, but they don't influence humanity at all. They address outliers that are being studied, and one of the stories but they managed not to change the course of the story is none of these modes is going to take over. So it's different from June and June you have sorry, if you can cut me off, if

Vance Crowe 1:10:48
you will. No, this is awesome. I actually would love to hear your thoughts. Okay, go ahead.

Joscha Bach 1:10:53
So in June, in some sense, the opposite has happened. The low hanging fruits of technological development have all been discovered a long time ago. And there are still new technological developments, but they require extensive research now, they take takes 10s of 1000s years of making substantial progress. And a few things have been understood as that end. So for instance, AI is an existential risk, if you allow AI to emerge, then AI will take over because it can leverage more intelligence than human beings and technology than human beings. And if you allow AI to develop freely, it's only a matter of time until it takes over. So it's a cancer that needs to be stomped out in the dune universe, which also makes the universe more interesting because it's a reason why retain human aesthetics. And the battles are not all fought by AI. But computers don't exist in this universe. Everything is manually controlled, which very good storytelling device. But it also makes sense. Just the question is, can you actually stomp it out and he tries to sketch this out. The other thing is, the success of the players in your own universe depend on the ability to follow long term plans. So everything is about long termism about building conspiracies that go over an extremely long time span. And those players which are unable to follow these long term plans, they are the pawns in the game, and they're being sacrificed all the time. And they do exist, right like the traders are essential porn in the longer game between the Bene Gesserit and the Empire and a few other forces. And so the universe of June is also in some sense, a quite deterministic universe. But here the determinism is not because of astrological mathematics that Selden can figure out, absent the absence of understanding technological developments. But it's because people actually make plans because they actually forced the universe in their own determinism, because they want the universe to be deterministic, so they can control it right. So the determinism in the tune universe is the result of deliberate control by players that act against each other and try to fight against each other to fight against each other to make different universes happen.

Vance Crowe 1:13:10
I mean, the Sci Fi book reviews by Yoshi does is it would be an awesome spin off series, can you do three body problem next?

Joscha Bach 1:13:21
three body problem is interesting in the sense that it combines two different types of literature in my view, one is this mathematical, epistemological, philosophical stuff that is interacting with cosmology. And this was what the initial three body problem is about. And so we look at what does the universe look like from the perspective of an embedded observer? Can we make sense of it. And he describes this for an alien civilization that happens to live in a world that is completely alien to us. And it's so alien that our own intuitions about how the world works, and what makes sense do not apply. So we get basically teleported back to our own history. At a time where we had no tools, no tradition, in making sense, no narrative, no mythology that would explain how our own world works. Right before we had the idea that there are lumps of mass that are lumping together so gravity in space and then forming cents on planets. And these planets rotate on orbits in 3d, due to spatial curvature around these centers of mass and so on. This all these narratives didn't exist back when we started out. And so we now start out with a planetary system that has multiple signs. And as a result, the planet is an extremely complicated and somewhat chaotic trajectory, which makes it almost impossible to determine the future and to tell narratives of the future. And the species that lives on it. The intelligent species has adapted to it by going into an hibernating stage. and that makes the species and their interactions extremely unintelligible to us and mystical to us, right. It's very arcane, brutish wild ways of interacting, that to them look sophisticated, but to us look alien. And this allows us also to look at the mode of civilization with fresh eyes. Right? When we now look at different civilizations, very often people ask, is this progress? Is this better? Or is this worse? They don't ask about why did this work best at that time, and therefore had to happen. And when we think about Genghis Khan, we think oh my god, this is very brutish, very primitive, it killed a lot of people, the way they lived, schematic style, and so on, was, in many ways inferior to the way in which we perceive our society to be get it was almost able to vie Western society out. How was that right, there was a mode of organization that was much, much more effective. And evolution is not about what's better, it's about what's more effective, right? Good. Embed only exists with respect to a shared purpose. So it exists with respect to a hive mind that you are already part of. And so the three body problem leads us first of all, out of our present hive mind, out of our present mythology into a new one, and then leads invites us to look at our own world with fresh eyes, from the perspective of an alien civilization.

Vance Crowe 1:16:26
Oh, man, go ahead. This is an excellent review. I mean, I read the book and to Kuwait, totally different contexts, but it was I'd hear you describing it. I'm like, That's exactly right.

Joscha Bach 1:16:38
And if you look at the dark forest, I think that's an very important contribution, the dark forest paradigm,

Vance Crowe 1:16:47
which is the second book of the series, so there's three from the dark forest. And then the third watch. That's right, the watch.

Joscha Bach 1:16:54
The Dark Forest is constitutes a break from the three body problem, right? Even though there is normally a connection, because it turns out that this rebodied civilization does indeed exist, and it's going to interact with us in detrimental ways. The narrative is completely different, he suddenly gets thrown back into our present society. And he tells a very interesting particular narrative, you have a woman who is the daughter of a scientist who was a victim of the Chinese Cultural Revolution. And she hates in the Chinese modern day equivalent of city of the search for electric extraterrestrial intelligence is looking for signals from species from other planets. And that dark forest paradigm is doing away with the hippie notion of space exploration. The hippie notion of space exploration is that being a hippie is the natural mode of society. And this is, for instance, the perspective that is in the new Graber Vango book about civilization, that basically people are by nature, hippies, they are kind to strangers, they're kind to each other. And they only get mean to each other when evil people get on top and manipulate society into inventing the patriarchy and all the other bad things that are making people evil and aggressive and are leading to imbalances in power and oppression and injustice in the world. And this is a position that is very near and dear to my heart in a way because I am the I think the result of evolution that turns people into domesticated beings and I am domesticated myself in this way. I am sheep. I have a strong indignation against initiating violence. I'm not a wolf, I don't get off by biting somebody's throat and drinking them is, but evolved as people basically are fine with that code and what's best in life? Right? It's what is its love to read your enemies and hearing the crying cry,

Vance Crowe 1:19:16
cries and the lemons of their women right? As they're driven

Joscha Bach 1:19:19
before. Yes. So this is a state that you can be in if you are a warrior and the Warriors which are successful as warriors and there are peasants and men are craftsmen and mathematicians that are successful in their professions. And they will have different inclinations different aesthetics and the hippie aesthetic is a particular one and the science fiction of the our present civilization, the Star Trek universe and so on, has essentially been developed by hippies who thought that they might techno hippies there is who think that you will need technology you will need degree of weaponry to have Peace, you need immune response in your society. But by and large, people are good intelligent beings are good, they want to link up, they want to be harmonic, they want to be friends with each other. And once we meet them there will be based to explore how this works. And they are often at an earlier stage of development, that they have not discovered yet that they're all hippies. Right. So it's very beautiful perspective. And I really liked it, I'm sympathetic to it. And it took me a long time to work through this and realize that it's probably not true. Because the thing that is built around this, or that is built on this identity, and it's the last stage that Keegan describes. The fifth stage is when you get agency over your own identity, your own identity, whether you are a hippie or warrior, or a peasant, or a mathematician, and so on, and you think this is the right way to live. This depends on certain way, on your purposes outside of yourself above yourself, yourself tends to be downstream from this, it depends on what's sacred to you, it's depends on how you relate to transcendental agency to the next level agent that you're part of, if you don't relate to any next level agent that you're part of, you have to be either at the top, which means you are some kind of singleton that is governing everybody else, and very few people are capable of that, or you will be ineffective, because we are a state building organism we have to do to achieve anything on the planet do this together as others, preferably with very large groups that you have to deeply interface and cooperate with, right? So this relationship to shared purposes to sacredness is crucial for us. And it shapes who we are in our own understanding more than we typically are aware of, and being able to understand our own identity of our own sacredness, the construction of our own sacredness, and being able to change that is very powerful. And once we understand that identity is flexible, we begin to understand the identities of other people, they understand where they're coming from, that their identity is the result of where they were born, in which site on the Middle East conflict in Israel result, not whether they're good or evil, or stupid or smart, or insightful, or damp, but it's the result of them being born in a certain place and the things that happened to them, and then the thoughts and insights that they had as a result of that. And so, this is the crucial thing, that you have to understand that this an ecologic opinions are built, people have all opinions that are possible to have physically in a way. And you can find all possible opinions on the internet. It's not because people are especially stupid or especially mean or especially smart, just because it's possible they will emerge and incentivized opinions will be abundant. So back to the dark forest. The Dark Forest idea is that the natural mode is that there is scarcity in the universe. And the main scarcity is real estate, there is only a limited place, a number of places that are good. And there is an unlimited amount of potential life that wants to settle them. And life by itself is a principle. It's it's this principle of growing complexity in the environment in a scalable, self replicating way, the only way that life is possible that you know, is cells in this carbon cycle. But maybe there are other forms of life that are conceivable, but you need to have something that is able to settle to create complexity. And I think what's crucial for the type of life is that we are looking at is that it can solve almost arbitrary control problems, which means it has to have a Turing machine built into it some kind of small computer that can model reality in arbitrary ways. And on this computer, it somehow needs to implement the function approximator a way to learn how to do that. And the simple system that is able to do this is the cell. The cell contains a small Turing machine, DNA RNA tape with a readwrite head that is able to execute programs and evolution can modify these programs. And on top of that, the cell has evolved more mechanisms for learning. So this is a little single celled animal right itself isn't little being that is exploring the universe and try to try to survive in this universe maintain its own equilibrium. And to do this, it needs to harvest more energy from the environment, or at least as much energy from the environment as it requires to maintain its own structure. So this cell is also a little empire of molecules that are arranged in such a way that they can conquer a part of the universe and extract resources from it. And then cells can lump together to build this empire together. And then you have an organism and an organism is tight organization of cells that act in a coherent way with each other. So there is something like a meta cell they solve control problems together. life can survive because it is able to put a little bit of energy into the environment to get more energy out of it to solve a control problem in this way, which a dump chemical process cannot do, because the dam chemical process that combustion cannot actually compute anything, it cannot make a model of the future. So it's only following a direct radiant. And this ability to do something that is not just following a direct radiant, this is what makes our mind special and what makes life special. So once you have that, once you realize that that is the basic driving force of evolution, the ability to settle and to build empires, and the harmony that you have within the Empire is just something that happens first in your kingdom that happens is the mode of harmonization is in the group. And as a result of intergroup specialization, but doesn't happen at the frontier of the group you need to pioneer. Once you make that switch, you realize that when you meet aliens, these aliens will probably not be happiest. Because if there is a way for people to meet each other, because faster than light travel is possible. It means that the universe will probably be settled, all the surfaces that can be settled will be settled after a certain amount of time. And they will be settled by the most successful colonizers by the most successful empire building species.

Joscha Bach 1:26:19
So this is the idea that the explorers life is the normal mode in nature in the jungle is afraid it hates unless it's on the prowl, and on the hunt. And so that's why the forest is dark at night. That's why US Forest is making a seagulls was making yourself known.

Vance Crowe 1:26:39
This is so fascinating to me. So for people that haven't read the book, the the reason I consider the dark forest is I think of the almost obscene level of loneliness that the wall faces would have to be. So there's these characters that they are the human race has to and this is the very beginning of the book. So I'm not giving anything away. The human beings in order to out compete these colonizers that are coming for them sometime in the future. If they write anything down or say it to anyone else, the idea will instantly be known by the alien race. And so for me, I sat and thought about the social implications throughout the entire book that was like the

Joscha Bach 1:27:23
this is the circle. But so here is the water. Yeah, the water to the wall. So the first one is, the second one was that you're almost done with the second, let's work this up. Our Chinese scientist, there's a broken family history in their big pain about humanity in the way Burke's because she has never gotten over the loss of a family and the Oh, that's right, your Roshi is sitting in this American city project. And she is she is not a hippie. And she does realize that there is danger in communicating with the aliens, because the message that you get from the aliens is from a nice guy, from the hippie guy from this other civilization from a friendly liberal, who is sending a message and tells them, I just got your signal, stop sending, I got this, I will hush it up. Because if my species learns about your existence, they will account for you. And you'll be done. And she decides to respond to this message to invite the aliens to Earth. And that's because she, from your own perspective is thinks that our own civilization is doomed,

Joscha Bach 1:28:38
in part because her own heart is broken. But also, in part because she looks from this brokenhearted perspective that's traumatized perspective on our civilization and sees that you're not able to solve our ecological, political, social coordination problems. So if you leave humanity alone, without human supervision, supervision, we are gone, we are doomed. The only way that we can possibly survive is by getting adult supervision by being enslaved by an alien species. And there is a possibility that this is not going to end well for us and that we are going to be completely eradicated. But there's also a chance that you might be saved. And if we don't take this chance, there is no chance that we will survive, she decides if left by themselves, humanity will eradicate itself. That's her own perspective. So she invites the aliens to come to earth and the aliens notice and they sent a message and this message is basically we are technologically so far superior that we don't care what you will do against us. And they sent a faster than light probe that is extremely intelligent and uses physics that is far outside of the reach of what humans can do and uses this to sabotage all further progress in foundational physics. So we will not be able to develop super dense materials that are basically have the density of nutrients dart in the heart of a spaceship, so we can innovate, break it up, and so on, or harvest energy sources that allow objects to move much, much faster, and accelerate faster and corner much faster than our ships can do it and so on. So we have no chance to win this competition. And the aliens are sending a fleet in motion that is moving from a sim from Alpha Centauri at slower than lightspeed. So we do have a certain amount of time until they will be here, but there's nothing that we can do about it. And to do something about it. Anyway, humanity devices, this plan of the wall phasers, which are agents that are unpredictable. And they hope that by being unpredictable, we might have a chance against the aliens. So they create a few agents that work in hidden behind the government, the government's are not allowed to interfere with that the hive mind is not allowed to interfere this. And this is an interesting perspective, because I think it's an attempt to reflect our own fate right now. Obviously, the author of these books, thinks himself that his main character has very good arguments that we might be doomed as a civilization. And globally, we cannot escape this destiny. So we need small disruptive agents that find solutions that build networks among themselves, and try to find a solution to solve the impossible, the seemingly impossible, and I think that he does a good job and building a good narrative in the last book. From a flood perspective, it's quite interesting, because you see, people that do long term plans that are very counterintuitive, that include assassinating some good people that otherwise would trigger technological developments that are not the right ones from the perspective of a particular officer, and so on. But eventually, the aliens are defeated visit Deus Ex Machina, that is not completely plausible. So I find that the resolution of the Certbot series is unsatisfying. Because it is something that is, is not logical, it's not something that you would expect to happen. And this also conveys an important message while the book ends on a hopeful note, the hopeful note is enshrined in action actually don't have a good reason why it should be ending, hopefully.

Vance Crowe 1:32:28
Yeah, I actually came to the conclusion when I ended the book, like, sorry for anybody that this is ruining it for you that it was it was not unlike like Game of Thrones or lost or something where you're just like, I've been in this whole ride, it's been beautiful. And something ended. And I just had to conclude that maybe this is the dream that you tell yourself, so you can go to sleep at night because this this anyone rationally having read the thoroughness with which he used logic on every other part of the argument just wasn't it wasn't there in the last three pages of the book are five pages of the book.

Joscha Bach 1:33:02
So if you feel bad that is for the book. I don't think so because you only spoil it for people who had been living under a rock and didn't read it because it was one of the most important science fiction in the last few years. So it's, there is a very good chance that the people who haven't read it, we're not going to read it anyway. My.

Vance Crowe 1:33:21
Well, my belief so Rob, long, one of my good friends always says you can't actually spoil a really good book, because the good the great book isn't in the conclusion. It's in the experience of the book. And it's

Joscha Bach 1:33:33
also one particular perspective. And I think that there are many valid perspectives on these books. And it's only what I took personally out of a single reading.

Vance Crowe 1:33:41
Yeah, I read the the watcher, the final book, just shortly after my daughter had been born, and the isolation that these people had to go through in order to be wall phasers, I found to be a visceral experience, I don't think I will ever forget the experience of reading that book. So um, to wrap up, you know, you've made reference to, we've seen one of your children walk in the background, you know, you have kids, I have kids, we were talking about software and downloading it on them. As you think about being a parent and you've been one for a few years now. What do you think is the most important lesson you've you've had to learn about being a good parent?

Joscha Bach 1:34:24
I'm trying to be a good parent, I don't know if I always succeed, my own, tend to be a good parent is to support my children in finding their place in the universe. But doing this means to support their autonomy in doing this. So my idea is to not tell them what to do, but to tell them model this look at this thing. Have you taken this into account? And I take them seriously as individuals, I remember and I try to remember what it was like to see the world through the eyes of a child It's not that long ago, after all. And I understand that for me, the crucial thing was that I was creating my own universe, I was making sense of the universe by myself. And I didn't experience at any point that my way of thinking about the world was inherently inferior to the way in which the adults thought about the world. Just because there was a child, I felt that I could see many things that the adults could not see. And the same thing is true for my children, they do see a lot of things that I am incapable of seeing, because I can no longer resolve them. And so I asked my children, often, I asked for their advice about parenting sometimes, about what to do. And I tried to explain my decisions when they're frustrated about them.

Vance Crowe 1:35:45
In what can you give me an example of a thing you've asked them for advice on that seems very counterintuitive.

Joscha Bach 1:35:53
If a child is very disruptive, right, there is a reason why the child is disruptive. And you can ask the child, why did why it happens like this, and what to do about this?

Vance Crowe 1:36:06
Well, you should, I know you gotta run, I just wanted to say, as a parent, I remember reading your tweet about childhood being the Garden of Eden and how how the it's, it's a metaphor, but it also is a representation of what all parents want to do for their children. And I have to say that that has been reflected in my own parenting decisions in the way that I've interacted with my child. So I can say for certain that your Twitter feed and the ideas that you put into the world have impacted me and my family in deep and profound and very positive ways. So I hope you continue on and know that I absolutely love talking with you.

Joscha Bach 1:36:46
That's a beautiful essay by Paul Graham. From 2008, lies you tell kids, it's has aged well, and it's interesting to read it. Many of the common misconceptions that we have about the world, or the result, I think of lies that are being told by our parents. And some of these slides might be necessary, because they will protect children from getting jaded too early, or for just being incompetent adults, instead of explorers, that are fearless and fierce and can go out because they're being shielded from some of the dangers, right. So it's sometimes necessary to create a certain safe place for exploration, that allows the child to take risks that you cannot take as an adult. And, on the other hand, if you don't tell the children how the world actually works, if the goal of parenting is to shield children from the hard truth of the world for as long as possible, regardless of what the child can understand, and do this, in children have very dark fantasies. So they already understand very dark things in their own mind to be possibly the case. But if you if you shield them from them too much, you lose this risk that every generation loses the plot even more. And I think it's important to be truthful, to be truthful, of the things that are painful to us, that hurt us to be truthful about our joy and our sadness. And in this way, also allow children to deeply connect with us because they experience the world in a deeper way, I think then the Media Design for kids are doing that. So this garden of Eden means that you have a place where the children live in a world where the animals are vegetarian, where there is no evil, the evil is just a pathology. It's not the result of conflict, it's not a result of something else wanting your food and having from its own perspective or right to that. And understanding this conflict is very different from say, Disney and compared to the Grimms fairy tales. We don't live in the grim fairy tales world anymore, thankfully, right. So we don't necessarily need to tell our children, that there are people out there that that would eat them, and their parents might send them into the forest because they don't have food to feed them anymore. And that so if this happens, we need to make sure that they don't get eaten by others that are nice to them. But there is a truth in that right. So this this conflict about violence and deaths does exist it just something that not only now exists at the fringes of society. And when these stories were created, they were created in different universe. They think that the stories right now that we tell our children to negated exist for our children do not depict our universe very well. They're not truthful. And they basically make our children very vulnerable to indoctrination with ideas that are not true that manipulate our children into things that are not in their best interest. And that many weighed them away from getting agency over their beliefs and ultimately their identity.

Vance Crowe 1:39:58
You recommended with Lex Fridman a an enemy movie and I just can't the name of it. Makoto Massoud that Princess Monica, Princess Mononoke, that I watched that last night. And I was struck by the idea that there was not it was not a clear, obvious outcome like the, it was just it was fascinating. And it was so complex. And I was like, I would so much rather my children watch a cartoon like this where the character has development, and everyone has their own reasons for doing what they're doing. And there wasn't just a clear line between good and evil, I found that to be profound. And I'm

Joscha Bach 1:40:42
talking to all his movies, so you should watch all of them. And when you do it with your kids, you probably want to start with the total row. Which men Wanaka is one where there are people decapitated. Very violent, right, it's probably something that is appropriate for 12 year olds, but not for six year olds, right. And the two of y'all better be somewhat precocious, even though my children both love the movie. But it's very hard to keep them away from this. But if you see these movies like total row, you have many, many layers. And they none of these movies is boring for adults or for children to watch. Because the story is unfolding like reality on many, many layers, you'll see things happening in the background that are just as complex as the thing in the foreground. The low level patterns are as interesting as the high level arcs is movies. And when there is a big question, the question often doesn't have an answer. And very often you just observe things. So all these movies in some sense, describe an arc of our civilization from a certain perspective, without giving a resolution because things ultimately are not good or bad. They just are they only good or bad because respect to our current understanding?

Vance Crowe 1:41:52
I totally agree that there were no large questions answered. And like it for for an audience that's just been primed over and over again to the everyone lives happily ever after. This, it's a jarring way to end a movie, but it is still satisfying because the experience of watching the movie unfold is so complicated that you're engaged in it's not many, I can't imagine very many cartoons otherwise, that put you in a flow state, right, they put you in a state where you're completely absorbed by it in the same way.

Joscha Bach 1:42:23
Like you will notice that all his movies have the same main character. So is in some sense about this character. And the same main character is in this movie Mononoke, which is the equivalent of Mowgli, the main character in The Jungle Book, the child raised by wolves, in this case is a small girl. And this girl is not in as in The Jungle Book destined to live among people, because it rejects the fierceness of the forest and realizes that it wants to be in civilization. But it's socialized with the wolves with which a forest Scots and wants to stay with them because it sees the world from their perspective, it's their identity. And it's very different from the Disney version, where the progress is actually a pleasant place where everybody is happy part of the same food chain more or less. And this fierceness, this brutality of the world, the two symmetries of the world are well preserved in Monaca. But the main character is the same and now Zika. She is the princess in a post apocalyptic world. And it's the same in total, she is an older sister of in a family where the mother is in hospital and the father tries to write his PhD in a small village or in central Gianna. comica cushy it's what is she was it I think it's she here, what an American, and where she is a daughter of two parents who is going accidentally into a magical kingdom and making mistake and are getting transmogrified into pigs and she has to save them. This main character is very interesting because he is in some sense in his own aesthetic. The idea of auto type of human being because she is completely innocent. She is somebody who is very pure in all her interactions. Sometimes she is just a little girl that is trying to build a delivery service. Sometimes she is a little daughter that does her best to guide her sister. And sometimes she is a messiah, like now seeker, but or sometimes she is a fierce warrior in the woods, living battle that you can only lose. And that doesn't matter. But your stance is always the same as a certain immaculate thing. And in some sense, I believe that we actually might be the most interesting and important Protestant philosopher that Europe has, even though he's in Japan, and he's not what it is. Wow, the main character is actually highly it's this character from the history books that he has discovered during his studies for the IT movies very recently. Demeter, and he travelled to Europe and probably visited things in Switzerland that have formed his perspective on the world and informed his aesthetics. And Heidi is this character who is relating to others from a position of completely nonsense. It's a completely non superstitious, but he drives it he or she is has a very personal relationship to God. But God is doesn't have a form or shape or name or intention that is not superstitious, it's not a Christian mythology or something. It's just this transcendental agency that he is connected to, and that she wants to amenitized by building harmonic wealth and evade relating harmonically to the things around her. And this story is tell told from the perspective of those who ultimately surfer who make no sense possible. And the spirit of innocence and agency that she represents, is in some sense of spiritual aesthetic that Miyazaki develops throughout all of his movies. And I think it becomes transparent when you see all these movies and you realize these movies are not about answering the small questions. They are about answering the big question, how should I relate to this universe that I'm in? Not? How can all the questions of this universe be resolved? Because they cannot? There is no way right? We live in an entropic universe, everything is going to die when new things are growing. But how do I relate to this and he develops a certain perspective and certain shape of the soul and certain idea on how a civilization should work in these movies. And that's what I find very interesting, and I find it very compelling.

Vance Crowe 1:46:34
I'm going to clip all of this and we're going to have Yoshi has movie reviews and Yoshi has book reviews and it'll be great. Yeah, I am so glad to have to have had you on today. Thank you so much for your for your time.
