Joscha Bach 0:08
Thank you so much for having me. It is very exciting symposium. When we, we have seen a number of growth curves today that looked like this. And these are the goal was close that gap was very exciting. But when we zoom out a little bit, we realized that usually there's a thing that happens inevitably, if you live in a universe with finite resources, and you depend on the paddle of Nick entropy that you live on, you basically reach a saturation. So basically, everything initially looks like this is the first portion of something that looks like this. There is a saturation point. And if you zoom out a little bit more, then you often find that it's actually a hump, right? Because what comes up usually must go down at some point, again, so phenomena tend to be temporary. And so these trends are very different on the different level of modeling. And very often, the thing that you're looking at is actually something else like. So what is it that you're looking at what is true? And when we think about truth, we have this notion of ground tools. It's an interesting question, does our universe have a ground truth? I think it's probably not episode of Twin Peaks, it seems to be in a particular way, the idea that the universe is in a definite way and progresses in a different way, gives pretty good predictions, right? You can check test alternate ideas, and they don't give very good predictions. So it seems to be a good idea that our universe might have a ground truth. Of course, as an observer that is embedded in this universe, for trivial reasons, I can easily prove that I cannot know that ground truth with it, because it could be a hallucination, right, this universe that I'm seeing, I would still maybe have to explain the fact that I'm able to hallucinate, but when I'm hallucinating very hard, I might not have the necessary coherence, to trust my thoughts about my own hallucinations, right. So I need to make a lot of assumptions as an observer already, that I can then try to test to see whether they're good, good, good good predictions, to know what kind of absorb absorb and what kind of observations I can make, and whether I should trust them. And this idea, to which degree you should trust, your observation. This is called epistemology, what can you know to be true and to which degree and there is like a fundamental law of epistemology, which was discovered in about 1600 20. By Francis Bacon, he was certainly not the first one and not the last, this is, the confidence in your beliefs must equal this weight of the evidence, right, you should have all the possible beliefs have them all, you're not free to pick one because you don't know. If you can't don't know which belief to pick, you are forced to be agnostic, you're now believing that you're agnostic. If you have integrity in your beliefs, you believe that you don't know. And then you have to quantify the degree to which you don't know. And you're not free to pick an arbitrary null hypothesis. I mean, you know this from your interactions with your colleagues, the null hypothesis tends to be a very elaborate conspiracy theory that you just share with your peers. But this is not the way to find truths, right, you want to step back from this, you want to map the space of all the possible themes that could explain what goes on. And you need to express them and we're certain we need to compare them. And this is where it gets to language. So in a very general sense, language is more than natural language is also the things that used to think in, that mental representations are formed. It's anything that can represent something. So you can make models and language basically a set of rules for representing and changing models and the set of all languages is what we call mathematics. And your ability to make models is what we call intelligence, right? intelligence is the ability to make models, it's not the same thing as reaching your goals. This is what we call smart, or the ability to pick the right goals, it was very cold wise, very intelligent people are often neither smart nor wise. So intelligence is also something that is multi generational property. So our models often cannot be made within a single generation, a single researcher can probably not find out the difference between cats and dogs. Net is something that makes sense to be differentiated into, you need to build all these models for many generations, it takes more than one generation to invent a natural language, and then to make it during universal and strict so you can make actual proofs in it, and so on. And to discover the preconditions for making tools. This took a long time, right, it takes many centuries. And so there's this weird thing that while generations only produced these thoughts, individuals are often much smarter than the generation that are in because people tend to converge to beliefs. And if you converge to a belief, it's less truthful and when you didn't have a convergence force, right. So whenever you have something that tries to forces you towards convergence, it forces you away from truth. And truth is a very subtle and brittle vector, right. So as soon as you feel that there is a force acting on you, that is not exactly pulling you towards truth, on average group of people is not going to end up with truth. An individual might decide to resist this group cannot, which is why groups usually have Difficulty was truth.

Joscha Bach 5:03
So what we find is that why individuals might be smarter. Civilizations tend to be smarter than individuals. So if you zoom out over many generations, you will find that civilizations get a few things, right, that no individual gets, right. There is something like a civilizational intellect where many, many people make many, many bets and all these bets together, pan out better, right. And it's also something that there's something that grows, it's like a cathedral that's been built. And it cathedrals built over many, many centuries. This is a civilization of intellect and way in a civilizational, hive mind that tries to find a model of the universe and the civilization in that universe and tries to become conscious in the sense. And this thing is generated by people that think about this, and do this in a way that adds to this big building. It's like a giant cathedral. It's a thing that we built over many generations, when you have a machine, a truth, God, but it's a God that doesn't care about you. It's God that doesn't give meaning to your existence that rewards you for your earthly toils, it is not warm or cold doesn't help you. So the fire that drives you in order to feed it and build that thing must come from elsewhere. But this machine, in a way, it's the founding myths of our civilization, that people built this thing, this global thing that would reach the heavens, that would explain everything that is certain that to know and conquer it all this global optimum in the modeling space. And this project fell apart because people started not speaking in the same language, they started using different languages that were suddenly post modernists and continental philosophers, and lots of people that spoke in such a different way that it was no longer communication possible. Right. So this happens all the time. In order to build an intellectual tradition, you need something like time to think well, while you need to be able to sit down and sink in peace and quiet for a few 1000 years. And this never happens. Basically, after a couple 100 years, the dog flies open and a bunch of sacks comes in and says it's revolution. Now the king is dead, but you also all die. And they tear down this building that has been built over many generations. And two generations later, the knowledge worker drones, of the descendants of the new King come in and say, Okay, we need to do have this thing again, they try to recreate it. And they usually just recreate its likeness. And don't get the foundations, right. So all our civilizational intellects have scars in them. And these scars make it very hard for us to think about certain things, right? We have names for them. But we often we don't really know what they mean, because they don't point to the right foundations anymore. So many of the things that we talk about things like meaning, God, consciousness, mind, and so on, we think the you know what they mean, but we don't, it makes it very hard for us to really talk about them. And the way to systematically talk about things is mathematics, right mathematics is domain of all languages. And the subset that mathematicians are mostly interested in is the set of all formal languages, which means languages has properties in which you can make proofs, which you can decide what's a valid statement or not. And David Hilbert was super interested in this and right 1900, he came up with super interesting questions, still keeping mathematicians busy today. And didn't 1900 20 He came up with a super interesting question. He said, Let's prove mathematics itself. Let's do meta mathematics. Let's show that mathematics works. Basically, let's build a machine that is able to run mathematics in it. And let's make this machine for mathematics. Right. So if mathematics can do everything, like make all the models, we should be able to make a model of mathematics that we can run in mathematics. And then there was a very bad thing that happened and 1900 31 a court Ghouta discovered that you cannot build an interpreter in mathematics that doesn't blow up if you feed it certain programs. And Google has shown this by by Turing has shown this by inventing a machine a computer that was not invented at the time to make that visible, right, this Turing machine is one possible computer. And Turing church has shown later that all the computers have the same power, that doesn't really matter which one you pick. But if you have such a computer, and you're trying to do mathematics, and there are some programs, if you fit this, the semantics will blow up. But that's also good news. Because a little bit later, to bring him to the realization, oh, we have some properties and mathematics Like for instance, truth is defined as something that you can do after a get to after infinitely many steps. There is nothing physical that can do infinitely many steps. Maybe there's also nothing in mathematics that can do infinitely many steps and get the result after that. What is the value of a function that nobody has computed yet? Right? It should be undefined. It should be unknown. Maybe you can put a probability on it. But it doesn't have a value, right? So maybe a truth that is independent of somebody actually doing the work to find it is not a valid way. So this this way of defining tools already existed. The mathematics is called constructive mathematics to everything that has a value there needs to be computed. For instance, pi doesn't have a value. Pi is a function no But he knows the last digit of pi. Nobody living inside of a physical universe or in a mathematical universe is ever going to build a machine that's going to figure out the last digit of pi, as far as we know, pretty good proof candidates for that. So we are, we can build a machine that gives you digits of pi, and the costs get more and more high. When you try to get mortgages. And at some point, in any universe that you exist, you can no longer afford that cost. So the interesting insight that you bring in Minsky head is, you're probably machines that can find truth. Under certain circumstances, we don't quite know whether we are completely general, but maybe we are. And all the mathematics that you will ever encounter is dying on our computational brains. It's done with these things that go from state to state that follows certain rules that are somewhat deterministic, they're completely random to get there, otherwise, you don't get anywhere. And based on this, you are able to process information and make sense of a universe that reveals itself to yourself as differences in information, right? The meaning of information, its relationship to change and other information. If you make a model, you identify how information predicts changes and other information. This is the baby makes sense of the world. So now we have an epistemology that you can work with, we have an ontology of information that is discernible differences, we have a state that has a set of discernible differences. And the computation describes the state changes of a system by a rule that correlates adjacent states, and the computation can be continuous, or it can be discrete, which means it moves in discrete steps. And it can be probabilistic or it can be deterministic.

Joscha Bach 11:29
So what kind of computer would we need to run a universe like ours? It's an open question. In physics, if you talk to foundational physicists, they have very different opinions, personally, but the space of possible theories is no none of them is completely proven at this point. And so if you try to enumerate this space, the simple thing would be like a Commodore 64, it's a discrete state machine, which every state is definitely there's a finite amount of memory, of course, this universe will have a lot of memory. But still, then it's possible that it's a probabilistic state machine. That means every state can have several possible successor states. So the universe branches in a way. And it's like, if you want to see all these states and implement them, all you need a computer which has a memory leak basically has an infinite amount of state equity and or the you could have a quantum computer vision, which every state is a superposition of states or every state can be a superposition of states. Or you kind of have all these things with infinite memory. And number four, is basically the discrete state machine has infinite memory is a Turing machine in Turing's definition, or you could have a geometric hyper computer where the state transitions are completely continuous. And then every state infinitely many, many bits are moved and compared with each other, and then you have an equal so hyper computer where you can send information back in time, and so on. So these are all possibilities to think about computers and what kind of universe a computer were in that time loops in our universe, closed timelike loops, we don't know that it's meant we can construct mathematics in which this is possible. But it turns out that apparently, it was possibility that the Commodore 64 is enough person that wrote first book about it was Conrad Sousa, the rationale around the calculating space. And then at Fredkin, and Stephen Wolfram picked up this idea. And of course, these people are crazy. And then at least, that's what many of the physicists will tell you. But then they came and talked and talked his his Nobel Prize for his contribution to the standard model. And a couple of years ago, he wrote a book and put it on archive, the cellular automaton theory of quantum mechanics. And basically, he doesn't find a limit to reduce quantum mechanics to cellular automata. In what he's doing. So what does it mean that the universe is a cellular automaton means so you have a state space, every moment in the universe is a state vector. And then you have a rule that gets you to the next state, right? laws of physics are the rules that correlate adjacent states. Now, what's the Senate automata, and the most famous one is probably this one. It's Conway's Game of Life discovered in the 1950s. It's super simple. So basically, you have a grid, very regular flat grid, every cell has exactly eight neighbors, this is a cell this is this neighborhood, and you count the number of neighbors that are alive, every cell is green here is alive, so everything that's Black is dead, right? If a cell has exactly three living neighbors, it will come to life. And the next step, if it has the less than two neighbors, it's going to die because it's too lonely. And if it's more than three, it's going to die of suffocation. These other rules, you know, do this step by step. And as a result, the whole thing will start to evolve in a certain way right it moves and then it settles into a stable pattern after a while, this always happens. The stable pattern can have a period of one which means everything is that but it could also be that it goes on a very, very complex pattern for a very long time. So there are some patterns that have the property that there are periodic but they copy themselves along the lattice along this space right We call this pattern collider. And using these sliders, you can send information around in the lattice, right, you can send information between different positions in that emergent space. Before you can send information from location to location, you don't really have a space. Now suddenly, sliders turn game of life into space, and you can make stuff happen in that space. So this is all made in Game of Life, and it zooms out. You see here, gliders that are being produced by small automata, which are called glider guns. It's all done using this very basic simple rules, right? This is only this only starting configuration is different. And what you can see here is you can build game of life and game of life, it's Turing complete, you can create your own completeness means you can build any automaton that is at least a universal computer in every other universal computer. That is at least a universal computer. So how can you make this more continuous and you have gliders that move in all directions, somebody made a version of life that's called Smooth life to use just many more pixels, and then you counted for a fraction of the pixels that are alive in a certain radius around you said similar intervals. And what you get is something like this.

Joscha Bach 16:24
So then you can think about this, how this will generalize into into number theory, basically try to find all the possible sets of interactions that make it possible that gliders exist. And glider is basically something that constrains information to a local volume of space, which means usually, if you live in something that has an irregular letters in it, you want to make this robust against disturbances to this thing needs to be near differentiable, which means the operations that keep that thing in motion and in the constraint in a space are rotations. And then we discover that there are only rotations in two dimensions for them interesting eight dimensions, these are identical to the spinner spaces. But this is a different story. This leads us to a universe that possibly inhabit so we can basically build a mathematical theory a priori of a possible universe, with interactions in which information is sent around in space. And then we can check for the set of mathematical theories in which that is the case, if one of those conforms to what we can actually observe. And we are possibly in this thing, you will never know whether we will be in this thing. But what we can do now is we can try to mathematically explore the space of possible universes that could potentially give rise to party data actions that are shaped in such a way that it would give rise to something like us. And then we could check whether the predictions of the actual model conform to ours. We don't even universe like this, this is Minecraft. This is a universe in which you can build like as we'll see here, now this Patreon will be can you can build a perpetual mobile in Minecraft. Because Minecraft can forget previous states you can delete information in Minecraft, our universe empirically, is reversible, which means it does not forget information. If you make something clean, something else gets dirty. Which means if you want to stabilize your structure against the onslaught of a universe that wants to go in a different Weber's structure, you need to delete the changes that you're making in a way because otherwise, the accumulated disturbances will accumulate in your system, which means you have to flush them out. And these garbage splits are what we call entropy. So in irreversible processes, one that deletes bits and the reversible one is where every state has exactly one preceding state. And apparently, it seems that we live in a universe that is reversible. And maybe we can explain this by the fact that our universe is somewhat deterministic. Because if it's deterministic, even if it starts out irreversible, like Game of Life, that forget states after a while, if you're Trump periodic, once you are periodic, you are reversible. It's an interesting question whether it's possible to have an alternative to computations. And once you get out of this. So the problem is computational ism is that once you discover it, you can explain everything visit, because everything that I see is only differences in information. And you can always account for these differences in information with a computational theory, right? It will always be able to construct a computer that produces an arbitrary pattern that I'm going to see on the screen, no matter what pattern you give me, I will be able to write from that makes it right, it's trivial. So there is no way to prove that my computational theory is not the right one, or that my computation was framework is the right one because as soon as I have discovered computational languages, I will never get in a situation where I just can prove that a computational language is not the adequate tool, because it will always produce the best model under the circumstances. So but if the universe is something else entirely, you will never know. Right? And there is a suspicion like Penrose has this. He thinks that our brains actually can do all of the mathematics and there are things that we can do that machines cannot do. He hasn't shown anybody any like thing like this, but he thinks that this is Google's implication. I think it's his misunderstanding. But he basically believes that it's possible that our universe is in our minds, implanted mathematics that are more Then computational. They're not just continuous or something but something fundamentally different. They're also not just quantum quantum is just the computation in the complex numbers. Right? It's, it's nothing magical. It's just a different way to look at computations. But But Penrose thinks is there might be something that is more than computation, some kind of extra computational operator, he wouldn't quite put it into these words, I guess. But this is a way of looking at and the difficulty is, if such a thing exists, you cannot observe it right, it can be can also not describe it, you cannot think about it, because it cannot be done with any language. So, in a way, if you cannot observe it, if you cannot describe it, if you cannot think about it, what kind of evidence can we have to have any confidence in the existence of that thing?

Joscha Bach 20:52
Maybe a nonzero one, but it's hard to say. It should be probably infinitesimally small from my perspective. So I suspect that minds are indeed computational observers. The traditional perspective that we have and in idealism is the insight that we live in a dream. In the old days, people figured out that we actually live in a dream like magic is possible, there are certain rituals that you can perform, that will completely change your life. Sometimes telepathy, sometimes you can look into the future, you can make magical rituals to look into the future, you can make magical rituals that allow you to levitate and so on, but there is a price that you have to pay for magic. If you if you do too much magic, Your life tends to fall apart further down the line, apparently, if you read these books, so there is something very interesting going on there. But idealism is basically the idea. We live in a dream dreamt on the mind of a higher plane of existence. And it's typically being understood in opposition to materialism, which means we live in a mechanical universe, right. But I don't think that these theories actually in opposition, they are complimentary. They, the mind of a higher plane of existence is generated by the brain of a primate that lives in a physical universe. The universe that we experience is not the physical universe is the dream generated by the neocortex to predict data and your sensory interface, right? There are no colors and sounds in the physical world. colors and sounds are geometric models that your mind produces to predict the next set of patterns on the top levels. Right, when you when you see people, there are no people in the physical world. But there is a weird quantum graph out there. And you predict features of that by predicting things that happen on your retina, or you think happen on your retina, based on models that your brain is computing in these models that your brain is computing is what you experience. It's reality. It's a hallucination generated by your brain, the same circuits that produce dreams during the night, produce to your dreams during the day. But during the day, if your brain is well calibrated, track the changes in your environment and predict them as well as they can, right. But this is the reason why magic works. You can fuck it up, you can change your memories, you can change your predictions, you can think that you are able to predict next week lotteries, numbers, but you actually bet your money you're going to lose because the bank always wins. Right? This is the condition that you find ourselves in. So we can explain this pretty elegantly in this sense. So this standard perspective of idealism is that we have the strength universe, and there does exist within the mind, the mind dreams, this universe. And then we have the dualist perspective, where you have basically two computers, one that is producing regular patterns, and another one that is the mind that encodes and processes these regular patterns as an interface between them. And then there is the idea of computational this monism, which is pretty much materialism. So we have a universe that produces regular patterns, and also produces the mind, which is a set of regular patterns that have the properties that are able to take stuff in over an interface and encode it into regular patterns by itself that are representations of what goes on to predict them. And, as it turns out, we are simulated observers inside of this mind. So my itself is a model inside of the model of the world, right, myself is an agent that my mind has created, or it's an representation of an agent of the mind has created to make its own interaction with the universe predictable and explainable. So our computational ideas give us a unified perspective on epistemology, what can be known on metaphysics, what's going on? And on ontology, what exists? And people like Marvin Minsky start don't care, okay? Now, if you want to understand the mind, we need to take computers and teach them how to think and know in that process, we will able to understand what minds are. And this started in amazing field. But Minsky was, I think, too smart for his own good. What he discovered was that languages are super important. So he started symbolic AI, and basically try to build downwards from the idea of symbolic knowledge, downwards into reality, right to ground this knowledge of entering perception. And his cognitive AI was symbolic AI. And there were a lot of other people that other things that were more inspired by cybernetics and by neural networks and Minsky, yelled at these people because what they were doing was too simplistic. And it was true, it was very simplistic. But when you yell at people that do things that work quite well and get better all the time, they usually don't stop doing what they're doing, but they stop talking to you. So, Minsky, who had read Piaget and understood this, his significance for the mind created an enormous burn ground around his idea of cognitive AI that nobody crossed anymore. And most of the people that did AI and practice, were not Minsky's disciples, even though that those existed and basically tried to emulate his thoughts. The others, they did everything but not read. They didn't read Piaget, they didn't think about the mind anymore. They thought about how to make machines smarter and teach them interesting things. And that basically, this rift is something that from which AI hasn't recovered, really, to this day.

Joscha Bach 25:52
Big problem also in AI, was that the question what is intelligence? I think it's the ability to make models in 1950 was a lot like the question What is life and 1650? Basically, people knew by pointing it, but they didn't know what it was what they're pointing at, right? And now we know, the answer is for life is pretty simple, itself, right? Life is the dynamics of cells, that must have been preset a life at some point, but was not stable and was gone quickly. And aborigines is probably super rare. Sal is a molecular machine that is able to extract neck entropy with a wide range of environments, it's the smallest, and then you know, and so it's self stabilizing neutral molecular machines that combine the two machines with his tape with the right head on it. Yeah, the self replicator and Nick entropy extractor, and the whole thing can participate in evolution to adapt. So if we zoom into the cell, it's super fascinating how complicated this machinery is. And the Jain genome basically, is an operating system for the cell. It defines a number of programs encoded as acids, organic acids that tell us tell the cell how to transition from one state into the other, depending on the environmental conditions. And the reading state of the right head, it's very much like a cell automaton implemented on top of a Turing machine in every cell. So it's an arbitrary complex function. And it's relatively poorly understood machinery, but it's surprisingly complex. So this is your DNA string, your you have to replace only replisome is the thing that is able to splice DNA to copy it.

Joscha Bach 27:31
This is stuff that's rapidly playing out in real time. It's, it's amazing that this machinery exists, right? So most of the our DNA codes for making a cell or repairing a cell, mate mean you could ever make yourself there, it's a very interesting thing, organisms and cells are not made new organisms starts with no cells, right? You always take cells and divide them. This first cell is still alive and all of us. We are all instances of the first cell. But not us, because V is a story that is being told in the brain that is formed by lots of these cells. But yeah. So the DNA is not a blueprint, but it's an operating system. And genes either regulate, differentiate, divide or kill the cell is all they can do, basically. And this differentiation makes it possible that they get different cell types. And this leads to the type of organism that we are in that is built from different cell types. And these different cell types basically need to run different instances of the same operating system, they all share the same DNA. But they also need to have different state is the differentiation, the different modes that you will need to do up very differently from a bone cell, right? So that you have this tree in which they differentiate you from the different cell types. And this is a very small branch of that tree. And the difficulty is that it is flashdrive of the server, it stores its space state. That's what we call epigenetics. It's mostly intra organismic. It's based on the same organism, the information transferred in cells are differentiated, it's not much between organisms. This is basically something that deteriorates over time. It's one of the reasons for centers since our cells deteriorate. And we need to go to the next generation because of this specialization that we put into cells, which makes it necessary that the cells have flash drives. And you can reformat the flash drive to make the cell completely young again. And there is one animal that does this. It's treetops. It's the only multocida animal that you know that is totally immortal. It's a hydride that is able to switch between the Hydra and the jellyfish stage. And while it does this, the cells lose all differentiation. It's not an option for us because we don't want to turn back into a blast society and lose all differentiation. While people are immortal and rejuvenate us right would not be very helpful. So our ways of rejuvenating as is to have kids. It's a very poor substitute. So basically, these cells they are a way to adapt to environments and they actively search by evidence machines are the evolution is the act of search process that makes it possible for a part of physical universe to become more conforming to the conditions of the area of the physical universe that are into before this, the search is only in the sense that they are some region of the universities have that property because they have that property. And now suddenly, there are regions of the universe that have that property, because there is a search method that makes it happen, right? This increases complexity now, on its by itself in a way. And as soon as this happens, you have this, you have singularities this leads to an increase in complexity. And one of the first singularities in our planet was this oxygenation event, where basically the meaning of life turned out to be the hydrogenation of carbon dioxide, build your own structure via taking carbon dioxide from the atmosphere via photosynthetic process. To do this, you need to have a controlled reactor. So this is a market opportunity for light, if you can do something that you can outsmart a damp chemical reaction, an exothermic reaction, and do something, they need to add a little bit of energy to harvest more, this is basically always the market mounting of life controlled chemical reactions, right. And you can do some more smart chemical reactions on top of that. So the next singularity was that cells realized I can't harvest on the neck and neck injury from the environment by eating other cells, they are a very good source of Nick entropy, they've harvest a lot of neck entropy and stored it already in their own structure, I can take that. So let's form a pirate ship, let's form a small colony of writers that moves around and harvest other cells, right? This is animals, here we are. And some of these animals are decided that they would take part of this colony of the cells and deputize them with making the information processing for that thing for regulation purposes. And no, I have a nervous system.

Joscha Bach 31:45
So how does this nervous system work, it basically has a lot of feedback loops that take care of the regulation. And whenever the regulation is insufficient, our brain has something that reinforces certain regulations, and we make this weaker. So it's a learning system. And this learning system works by a pleasure and pain. Pleasure tells you to more of what you're currently doing. Pain tells you to less of what you're currently doing, right. So this is already a very good learning paradigm, but it has the drawback that it doesn't generalize very well. You want to generalize over different types of pleasures and pains, and you want to predict them in the future. So once you sort your pains and pleasures, you get a system of needs. An organism has to fulfill a number of needs. And depending on environment, there are also social needs and maybe cognitive needs. So our brain unsurprisingly does not only implant implement the regulation of physiological needs, but also of social needs and cognitive needs. So for instance, our embedding in a social group is part of our need regulation. And the hippocampus is a thing that is able to generalize needs to situations. So it associates needs the pleasure and pain in situations and environment. And we need to generalize over this. And this is what the neocortex is doing so the generalization over situations that are related to our needs. This is what the neocortex is doing it finds out what to all have situations, which create pain and pleasure in different dimensions have in common or not. And it does this basically, a good metaphor is synthesizer, the neural networks are quite different from biological neurons, they basically wait to chain some sort of real numbers. And they trained by the chain rule, and but there is a superficial similarity when you squint very hard to biological neurons, the computations are very different, it's very different paradigm. A nicer way to think about this, what the brain is doing is a synthesizer, if you know synthesizer, it's a bunch of almost randomly put together electrical elements, they have the property that when you put electricity in them, they go into oscillations, and you have a few knobs with which you can change the way these oscillations work. And over time you figure out to make these oscillations to exactly what you want to do. So they can produce, for instance, a sound, a sound exactly the one that you like, and you can use that pattern that they're produced to predict patterns in your environment. So sound is a pattern generated by some kind of synthesizer in your brain that makes this possible to predict patterns from the environment, right? Its sound doesn't exist out there. It's being played by a synthesizer in your brain to make sense of the data. So sound is a particular class of synthesizers. But this is exactly what we call sound. And this doesn't only work for sound, you can also do this for vision. So there are synthesizers that are produced color and spatial frequencies. Oscillators right. And once you've done this, you've once you've trained and you'll find good knob settings to make them produce the low level patterns that you can see, you can look for patterns inside of the patterns, which means you look for meta patterns, you link them together and you realize that you can, for instance, organize lots of different sounds into a single sound that only difference by pitch. Right so now we have a meta pattern that makes the give Miss explains more of the sound. And the same thing happens for colors and spatial frequencies. You can lump them together and you get Visual process. And you do this by an ND merge modalities at some point. And you will figure out that these visual patterns and the sound pattern can be explained by mapping them to regions in the same three dimensional space. And that you can explain the patterns in this three dimensional space by assuming that there are objects in this three dimensional space, which are pretty much the same in different situations that you experience, right. So we realize the people that I meet here that look very similar to some of the people that I've met in San Diego, for instance, these are actually the same people. And to make that inference, I need to have something like conceptual representation and address space of these mental representations that allow me to create possible worlds and generalize over the things that I've seen this concept, right. So in order to make that happen, we have several types of learning data, basically functional approximation mechanisms. And this is what the neocortex is doing. And it organizes itself into small circuits. And the circuits need to bind together and to lay a building block similar to Lego to form representations take them apart, and in different contexts form different representations. And the ways they form each other, they form little maps that are organized in cortical areas. And these maps talk to each other. And you can imagine that these cortical areas play together like an orchestra. So it's a stream of music that are being processed there, and every musician listens to the music around it, and uses some of the elements to make its own music and pass it on. There's also a conductor, the conductor is not even close. It's just an instrument like the others and its job is to resolve conflicts and decide what's being played tonight. If you don't have the conductor, you turn into a somnambulist.

Joscha Bach 36:42
Right. And you can also imagine this thing to be like an investment bank, you have lots of these units, quoting columns that are there to improve, anticipated reward, and the anticipated reward to make models about the universe, how to do this, and models of your own actions in the face of that universe. This is what they're doing. And the reward is given by management, but it will the major motivational system. So you now have a system that organizes itself, it organizes itself into more and more hierarchies. It's an AI, it's an AI built by an organism in order to make sense of its relationship to the universe via learning. And it figures out that the best model that you can come up with is it lives in a three dimensional world. So it produces a generator that produces three dimensional worlds and renders it in your mind by a hierarchy of synthesizers, and then realizes the whole game that I'm playing is about the person. And the brain is not a person, the brain cannot feel anything, humans cannot feel anything, it's a physical system, but for the brain would be very useful to know what it would be like to feel something. So what the brain is doing, it creates a simulacrum of a person, a story about a person that is playing out. And in that thing, this person is an NPC, a non player character, it's a character that is being directed by the result of what all the the brain is doing by the regulation that it has computed. But it's being used to tell the story and then the story, the story of a person gets access to the Language Center and says oh my god, everything is so feel so much and the sky is so blue and this cannot be explained physically, of course, it cannot physical system cannot be conscious only a simulation can, because of course has got it backwards. He says if simulation cannot be conscious, no properties, consciousness is a simulated property of a simulacrum. Okay, now, it will be interesting to go above this because it doesn't stop there. There is a certain way in which people link together that produces intelligent agents. For instance, a corporation, or tribe or a state is an intelligent agent, it has agency, it has a memory, it has goals, and so on. It's not sentient. So far, it's not sentient. But it's embodies information processing principles, because we live in still in multi level selection, which means groups that cooperate tend to win over groups that don't, if these groups have an aligned interest, and the difficulty is how to align this interest, humanity has found a very interesting solution. The first solution is reputation. So when you make fun you keep track of who did what, then you did, nobody plays a very short game, you can do something about this. If so everybody knows each other, they all play a long game reputation system is going to work. It doesn't work when you have a short game, which means you don't see people again, that you interact with or when you have too many people because then it's difficult to track keep track of who did what. So reputation systems don't scale. The ancestral tribes are very small like after 150 households it breaks down. So the solution that our species have found it means that we became less smart and give up agency over our beliefs and we came programmable. This programmability means that we are able to believe things without a good reason. You are kept we can be manipulated hypnotized into adopting policies and beliefs without reason. But other than convergence, and this ability to converge on beliefs, even when they are irrational makes it possible for us to move in lockstep and form arbitrary functional units. So this is how we killed the Neanderthals, we were able to eat them all because we could outcompete them. It's not romantic, we never had any doubts that they were random, Charles are conscious to the same sense as the Americans didn't have doubts that the slaves were conscious when they exploited them, or people just after animals worry about their consciousness. This is not the point. They just didn't care, because they wanted to eat them, or they wanted them to do the work. Right. So the reason why people are able to converge on purpose is not because these purposes are objectively good, but you feel to be good is it is exactly that programming. Values are the way in which individuals are programmed to move in lockstep, right, it's value is a belief without a prior does not follow from me saying, you get it usually via empathy. So a lot of people that do ethics in the sense that don't understand that ethics is the principal negotiation of conflicts of interests and the conditions of shared purpose. They think the ethics is about being good. How do I find being good while I am a good person? Goodness is the degree to which others are able to emulate my sense of what's good. There are objectively bad people, because they clearly don't do this. And oh, my God, they are in large groups. And for most of the history, most of the people were bad, that is very concerning. And we really hope that you can change the universe into a state where people are more good, and good things will happen as a result of this, right? It's a fascinating perspective that somebody can have that. It's surprisingly common.

Joscha Bach 41:24
So if you have such a need for, for norms, and many people have that if you if you're not a nerd, if you ignore me, it's basically it's in that word, right? Most humans are like this. Most people fall into norms, they're prone to fall prey to ideologies. So you basically look for systems rather than you which you can serve that gives meaning and purpose to your life. And this meanings, a set of meaning sacred purposes above your ego. And this is not a bad thing, right? It makes our civilization possible. It's the precondition for love. You can only love people, when you share a purpose with them. When you discover the sacred in them, the set of meanings that you cannot violate on pains of your life becoming meaningless, right? If you see that somebody is serving something that is sacred to you, you love them, this attraction is negotiable. Love is not negotiable, is that you serve a similar system of meanings. And this makes it possible. This is the inside perspective of me as a human homosapiens, from Uganda, primate that is able to cooperate with others, right? So I do have this of course, if I wouldn't have this, I would be completely free of this, I would be a sociopath. It turns out that the sociopaths that run our economy probably do this not because they're evil people and our economy is run by a conspiracy of evil people. But because their models are more truthful, because the neurons that have that have me in that group that makes me think that there is meaning loving other people, and obeying a certain sacredness, and I'm not willing to give them up because I subjectively feel that the universe would become emptiness, nobody talked to any more and to relate to and to laugh and be laughed. These people have still more provable things, because their model of the world that meaning actually doesn't physically exist, the physical system cannot have meaning there is no way to anything. If you have a more truthful system, your regulation will usually be better. So there is an interesting question, if can we build a machine that is completely truthful, the global optimum modeling optimum, you can still give the system values and can tell this is the preferred outcome. And we live in physics, nothing makes sense. Just things happen. But maybe you want to have some universities prefer them over others. And you give this as a task so that the system would be nice to have. So the first order AI was classical AI in its work by trying to find a problem that is interesting enough that requires human intelligence, and write an algorithm that can solve this, like playing chess, or parsing natural language. And this is what people did like until eight years ago. And what people do now mostly is that they write programs that learn this automatically that find this function themselves. This is what deep learning is about it's compositional function approximation, it's to just write a program that that finds the program that does what you want. So instead of writing a program that plays chess, we write a program that learns to play chess. And it's so fun or general, we don't know how to do this in the general case. But we can write a program that is very good at learning chess. And the next phase will probably be meta learning it we'll be learning how to learn. It's very tempting to think of our brain not as a learning system. But as a meta learning system, our brain is able to figure out how to learn a new thing. Right? And evolutionary sense is a very slow and unprincipled search for meta learning systems. Almost didn't happen. Half a billion years left until the atmosphere scan, not much, took one and a half billion years to get where we are. And we needed a few meteors and super volcanoes to get evolution out of the fact of local optima, where some brain dead lizard could all eat all the intellectual upstarts because before they could have long childhoods and generalize into Turing complete languages. Right so this is a very disturbing thought it almost didn't happen. We are the first species that is going to leave more phones than bones in the ground. Right? This next has never happened on this planet. We are also probably the last one that is able to burn it. out of court and short time to give us this amazing amount of plumbing that we have. It's also the thing that's going to be the reason for why we could say now we have had a really good run. And we have pretty much done, this is probably the last level of humanity. It's the most awesome one. Right? We have all this amazing planning now. And we can do all these amazing things before it's over. And it's probably necessary to have a species that has this amazing amount of plumbing, like the internet, how cool is that? You have a basically uncensored infrastructure in which you can talk about everything and have access to all of human knowledge. This is amazing, right? And it's only designed as a sub feature of a giant porn repository, basically, right? There was introduced to everybody as a part of their normal household plumping.

Joscha Bach 45:43
Almost nobody uses BKD, I think, right, and these chat rooms to do philosophy and science and mathematics, but he can do this now. It's really good. So to me, it's more tempting, can we maybe leave a few messages to the next species that is going to get there after may mean, be up out of LFC Gaia solution to prevent the next Ice Age, and that set the stage for a post mammalian evolution. It's so exciting to think what comes after us. So it could be a genuine CEO of search of the meta learning is not enough, is there a global optimum in the space of modeling functions, and this is maybe this civilization intellect. And if it now seems that this, she thinks is a machine to find truth and make sense of what truth is, isn't itself a machine that can be physically implemented, it's an AI, it's a physical system that is able to find truth in optimal ways, as much as it can be done in a mathematical or physical universe. And this to build this AI I think, is one of the most interesting projects that you can aspire to, before it's over. For the quote unfolds, there's that we already know when you're born people die, evolution will always get you we live in this reversible universe, which means entropy will always win out, this is a given, we always know that life is going to be a temporary phenomenon, it only exists for a brief period in the universe that is mostly dark. We have this brief flash of a mind on vary, the universe can be reflected. And I think we have a chance to go all the way to make a thing that makes the advance the nature of our universe and our existence, build this model. So to me one of the most exciting projects that you can have in the best time to be alive.

Unknown 47:29
You are an optimist?

Joscha Bach 47:33
All right. I try not to have emotions.

Unknown 47:38
It's hard. All right. Um, so do we have some questions? For this fascinating talk? What level of emulation Are you guys in right now? All right, so yes, okay.

Unknown 48:00
But I just want to know this because I can't help I can't help myself. What I'm what happens when the wavefunction collapses.

Joscha Bach 48:09
So. So there's no problem. I'm not a physicist. So I'm not entitled to have opinions about this. So everything I say needs to be bracketed in the fact this is completely meaningless. Because it comes from a non physicists I'm not anointed to the cut. And the only thing I did was to read a bunch of physics books and try to make sense of them from my very limited perspective. And I don't know whether anything of what I say is it has a good chance to be true. But it seems that the implication of the Schrodinger cat, when you think about this, for a moment becomes visible, and you put yourself into the shoes of the cat, right? The you sit in this physical proof box, the airlock closes and you go into superposition with respect to the other universe. It's not like there's a major majority universe that knows what's what's going on. And your cat is in the minority universe, this universe of the cat is actually pretty large, right? It has enormous amount of particles. So you're filling a box is not just basically insulating the cat from the universe, what it's doing is it bifurcates the universe into two universes, right? That are no longer entangled. And what happens is that these universes, get D correlated in certain Weber's respect to their actualization, which means when we understand this, we are all swelling, okay, it's the blink out in and out of existence. But we usually don't notice this, because you blink in it out of existence at the same face. We probably don't exist all the time, we exist in certain amounts of the slices of the evolution of the universe. So this universe is all automaton. We don't exist in every moment. Because the waves are not always sufficiently high. Imagine you look at a wave pattern at on your pool. You see these waves moving around there. And these, some of these days might be interacting with each other when they have the same face and otherwise they just go to each other. The wave itself is not always there. When you squint, right? You see that sometimes it's at the surface So this pattern is only visible in certain parts of the evolution of the universe. And measurement is the way in which we facelock this, where we interact with each other to actualize parts of the universe respect to us. So in a way, the phase space is probably implemented, from my perspective, it is possible implementation interpretation of what goes on. But we don't exist all the time. And when we try to figure out where we are by measuring, right, so this reduction of uncertainty is a reduction of uncertainty of where we are in the face space, which completely exists. This is one way of looking at it. There is another perspective that is awkward space doesn't exist. Bells inequality implies that space cannot be real, if you push something here and something because over there, there is no space, right? We know that you have understood this in the 1960s. So this means that the universe is not a big axial table where you have space rows and time columns. But everything is a value in that table. But rather, in the table, there are pointers, right, there is the same value implements this and this. And so the way of looking at this is the universe is a graph. It's a set of locations, that can hold information that you can tell apart, and trajectories along which this information can travel. Right. So this is what we mean by spacetime, it's the set of locations that can hold information while our perspective plus the trajectories that the information can take. And a good approximation of what seems to be going on. It's a lattice. So light can move in a lattice. And we can tell where the information comes from information that we cannot tell where it comes from. It's just random noise. Because we cannot find a relationship to other information. There's a lot of parent random noise. And this is what we call non local links, right in the graph, if you have a letters, you add links to the letters, you will have additional links that cannot fit the glider to go through, the glider always needs a number of adjacent pixels. So it can carry information about where it came from. So what what you will see with a non local link is only a single blip shared property between two locations, that an arbitrary position in the universe. So having information about that blip happening doesn't help you to predict anything else. You cannot correlate this to anything else, except when you know that this link exists. And this is this particular link. But you need to establish this via a classical connection, which means there needs to be another back channel that tells you this is actually this link. This means that you cannot really send information via this link.

Joscha Bach 52:23
So the other thing is, when you don't have enough links in your letters, what happens now, we know it's not a graph, it's a lattice. And the dimensionality of the space is given by the number of links in the lattice that you have regularly, right? If you don't have enough links, you cannot triangulate something in space. Imagine you have an electron that doesn't have enough links to entangle it is anything but the nucleus of an atom. What its is its position in space now, right? If you will try to project this, it's a sphere, if you think it's that you live in a three dimensional space, and you want to figure out, where is that electron in three dimensional space, it's going to be in a sphere. And if it's in more than one link, like a chain of entanglements, it's going to be something like a spheroid. And if you have multiple electrons that interact with each other, and with the nucleus, but nothing else, you get orbitals. But these are probabilities of where you would observe them. If you were in a 3d space, which you are not, you're computing indices, that universe is not computing. So the collapse of the waveform in this perspective means that the universe is getting to a point where the electron creates additional entanglements usually stops being an electronic process, and gives rise to a local interaction that can be mapped to a position in three dimensional space now, right? So it's, it's not that there's a surplus of information and you Hilbert space, and the surplus of information suddenly vanishes into a multiverse. But it's a deficit of information, you don't have enough information to triangulate this into his free space. And this is one of the defects of classic using classical mathematics for physics instead of computational mathematics. In classical mathematics, something has a value even if nobody had time to compute it. So the position of a particle in classical mathematics is always defined, which is very bad, because it's actually not defined, you have a problem, right? If the position of the particle is not a number of other function, that universe has been computed yet, you can only describe it as a probability. So the collapse of the waveform might be an artifact of using the wrong mathematics. Okay,

Unknown 54:20
so I have a question, which I'm not sure I'm gonna be able to formulate properly. And it's going to be in terms of shoulds. And I know shoulds don't really exist, so or why's

Joscha Bach 54:29
that exist from the perspective of an individual that's governed by I get that

Unknown 54:33
um, so my question is, why does it seem like the number of programs that are instantiated is increasing and programs like to instantiate more programs?

Joscha Bach 54:42
Why does complexity increase? Yes. So the reason is, I think evolution evolution is a search process that can create complexity to outcompete existing systems and sucking out Nick entropy, that you are the set of certain principles that has out competed all other systems in sucking Like entropy from your volume of space, so you can stabilize your structure and it's a competition. Technically, humans are yeast. All the complexity that we make building sorts theories is we can direct some surfaces on which we outcompete other yeast. The meaning of life is to eat from a perspective of somebody like me who has a mutation in the minds of conscious states. Pretty important. They just disgusting, right? Life is just yeast.

Unknown 55:25
Like it's fabulous. Okay, so I'm sorry, sizing it my objective function

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai