Joscha Bach 0:00
I'm briefly going to talk about the phenomenology of consciousness, then look at some of the traditional paradigms to explain it and make a case for computational ism, and sketch out an attention based model of consciousness and see how we can reconcile this with the existing paradigms. What is consciousness John Locke said, it's basically the awareness of what happens in your mind. Unfortunately, we are not very well aware of what happens in our mind. And most of the things that happen there, elude our awareness. So it's a perspective that I didn't find that helpful. We can look at consciousness as functionality versus the feeling of what it's like. And so the former, there's a bunch of functionality that is a present when I'm in a state that other people would call it conscious, there is the existence of a local perceptual space, a scene in which I find myself subjectively embedded, there's access to perceptual content in that scene, that is beyond that current world model that tells me that, for instance, right now, I'm in Tuscany, then there is a directed attention, which can be on cognitive processes or perceptual phenomena, then there is the ability to access and follow concepts and episodes and simulations in my mind, and then I can manipulate them. And there is a mental stage in which I can construct hypothetical universes. All this is functionality that seems to be enabled by my conscious activity. But what do I mean by this conscious experience this elusive feeling of what it's like, if I dropped down at the lowest level of my consciousness, subjectively, what I perceive is an elementary sense of a directed awareness. And if I zoom out a little bit, this becomes into the awareness of content, I see surfaces, I perceive objects, they have relevance that is given by this primary sense of relevance. And then I find myself being able to take a step back, and then to manipulate the content that I hold my awareness. But at this point, I'm already one step removed from this phenomenal experience, subjectively, it feels to me, like I have this elusive Consciousness, Light and a veil of class that I carry around in my mind, and it can look at it, but it's indirect, it's one step removed. And when I talk about these things, and reasoning about these things, this then consciousness is a far distant memory, it's the most hidden inside of my mind, that I talked to you about right now. So my linguistic content is no longer subject to this phenomenal experience. There are some stretch goals in my consciousness. Beyond these elementary things, there's the awareness of awareness, the fact that something pays attention. And that awareness itself exists. This makes it reflexive. And then beyond this, there's the event is of that thing that's on the other side of attention, the self, then I can look at yourself and identify structure and identify identify, identifications, things that I'm trying to regulate things identify with, I want to these things to be like that. And over this, like construct my own model of what I am in this world, what I should be and what I want things to be. And I can deconstruct this further and go beyond this. And at some point, I realize that I am not that thing. But there is some thing that alters this inner world. And at this stage, I'm depersonalized, I'm no longer a person, there is a construction of an inner reality. And I can witness myself constructing it. There are a number of traditional paradigms to deal with this phenomenon of explaining consciousness, idealism, materialist, monism, dualism, Pan psychism illusionism scientific and completion ism, which is basically the perspective that right now it's incomplete. But if you just continue with the scientific progress, then it will fall into place. And then Mysterion ism.

Joscha Bach 4:03
So idealism basically, it's the idea. Very colloquially put that consciousness is not physical, and that symbolic reality that the experience is primary that you basically live inside of a dream. And that dream is dreamt by a mind on a higher plane of existence somehow, and physical reality might emerge within consciousness. Unfortunately, it does not offer any functional models of how this is going to play out. So for some people, this is the basic truth. It's like a conspiracy, right? There's no mechanical universe instead, it's something more magical going on. And it does not explain the preconditions for existence of a thing that is conscious. What is materialism basically says that there is a cause of the closed lowest layer that is a mechanical or computational universe. And it can't be described in formal models. And we get things and causality as a result of modeling the universe as separate entities that share interfaces, so they can influence each other's evolution. and some version of that assume that matter and energy are primary. But now today, we usually construct this over information. So matter and energy are particular ways to talk about changes in information in this paradigm, but how can these physical mechanisms explain our fundamental experiments? Let's see appears to be a mysterious dualism is often associated with Cartesian Dualism. So you have res extensa and res cog attends res extensa is basically this three dimensional space of objects in which things play out this dynamical space. And now we see that this physical universe is not exactly as extensive as extensive is much more similar to my representations of a world in which things play out in my mind. And whereas cognate hands would be my beliefs about this, my intentions, everything that is not mappable on the region and free space. There is a problem when we take this dualism to be a statement about physical realms or existential realms, that you have a cost of the closed physical universe in which parallel universe of mental events how is the interaction between them facilitated is it possible for the mental domain to influence anything on the physical domain of the physical domain is causally closed. And there's pan psychism, Pan psychism, you get there several trajectories, one is basically wants to say mechanism interaction cannot possibly explain consciousness, but we can explain all the mechanism interaction. So, if it does not really emerge over that, it must be before matter, it must be, from the perspective of a scientific investigation appear inseparable from matter. Another perspective goes the experiential, phenomenological route. So basically, when you meditate, you can get to a state where you notice that everything in your mind is conscious, or all content of your perception, all objects that you interact with, are the result of something like a primordial consciousness, and this might give you an intuition of Pan psychism. In this sense, consciousness is inseparable from meta and you have this trifle separation of a primordial consciousness that is exists before physics, then you have on top of that construct of physics. And then on top of the constructive physics, you have to structured individual consciousness. So physical objects are conscious in a different way than they promoted conscious, because the physical structure is fooling this consciousness into consciousness like ours. Then we have illusionism, which basically says that consciousness does not take actually place somewhere, it's, it's not a physical systems cannot be conscious. Consciousness is an illusion. It's the perspective of Keith Frankish. And, in, in some way, also a dentist perspective, that we have Mysterion ism, which says that if you are a person that is as smart, as Noam Chomsky are almost as smart as you, I'm Chomsky and you spend all your life trying to explain it, and you fail and cannot be explained. And this is basically the position of Noam Chomsky. And if I think if we think about anything, and if something is represented, it needs to be done in the language. And the domain of all languages, is called mathematics. And constructed mathematics is the subset of mathematics that can be implemented. This is, I think, the most important discovery in the philosophy of mathematics in the last century. Your perspective with this might differ, but I, to me, it's really the most significant thing after basically developing a code library in mathematics for several 100 years, mathematicians have discovered that there are difficulties in this code library and contour for instance, and then Herbert asked mathematicians to fix this. And then Kurt girdle looked at this and set unfortunately, it cannot really be fixed, we cannot run a build a machine in mathematics that can run all of mathematics without breaking. And he called this on and tripartite.

Joscha Bach 8:49
And girdle also worked on this and he found a different perspective on this. And so the problem is that if you take this timeless nature of mathematics as its classically defined, the semantics of mathematics in which it doesn't matter how many steps poof takes, this falls apart when this poof takes infinitely many steps. And this meant that classical mathematics could not be salvaged a lot of philosophers of mind to girdles and incompleteness theory backwards, this they thought that means it means that mathematics is important and explaining reality. And instead, we need more vague languages that are being wielded by these philosophers without formal education which would give them an edge against these poor mathematicians, which which fail at dealing with reality. But I think it's the other way around what girdle engineering could show us that mathematic mathematics was ill defined and there is a subset of mathematics which works with its constructive mathematics and constructive mathematics is computation. And then the next thing that Turing discovered is that all these computational systems can be explained with a Turing machine or a similar system that many automata which have the same power and then after he discovered this, he thought maybe beyond that class so we are are a class of automata that is able to perform these computations that allow us to make sense of the world. And so he was one of the fathers of my own field of artificial intelligence, we can take this computation with his perspective, and then take the traditional, non computational perspective. So not completely computational perspective, like the geometry that you have a continuous type of computation, and explain this as a function. So for instance, pi is not a value and a computational perspective, it's a function, it's a function that you can plug into your local sun, and it will give you new digits until the sun burns out, and then you're done. But you will never have any computation that relies on knowing the last digit of pi. quantum computation basically assumes that the particle universe is very inefficiently implemented on a substrate universe. So if we can get access to the substrate, somehow we can perform computations using this underlying substrate that are, from our perspective in the classical universe, more than polynomially faster. The perspective that there could be closed timelike loops where you basically incorporate next week lotteries, numbers and today's computations. That's possible, if you would take our comparison universe, you make a copy of this, you run the rest of the computation to next week, and then you take that result and merge it back into the present state. So you could basically get two time loops, this caching dualism basically means some pre emptive multitasking, you could have two rounds, you stop this run, you perform something on the mental realm, you go back to this one, pen psychism means that consciousness has generated an apparent universe. I'm not saying that all these perspectives makes a lot of sense, but you can express them in some sense, all in the computational paradigm, if you really want to. So artificial intelligence is a computational philosophy of mind. And consciousness, I think it's a side effect of a particular kind of learning algorithm. Our perception of the world starts this pattern, when the visual auditory tactile, proprioceptive, or emotional, or imaginary, and the merge those into percepts, which cover features of the environment of our somatosensory environment, or have our own motivation and emotion, or of our other mental events that you're having. And then we can merge all these different modalities into mental simulations into a perceptual space. And this is what we perceive as reality. And it's made off of a model of ourself. And there's so we have a semantic search and social search for personal self, and current world state, that what you assume the universe around us is currently, and the mental state, which are emergent states that we don't confuse with the brand around us. But that only exists in our mind as memories, or imaginations of future universes, or alternative situations that we construct. In addition to this, we have generalizations over that. So we generalize our current world state into a map of the world, in the map of the universe. And we have a unified world model above this abstract knowledge about everything. And we have an attentional system that also gives rise to an attentional self, something like a conductor of this mental orchestra that produces all these representations. And this attentional system is able to track identities of objects. And if we don't have this, and something that we have discovered relatively recently in AI, it's difficult to make certain generalizations like in the old days, you had a natural language system that would translate the scent, the sentence like the bat broke a window, as in a different language that a bad group had been over the bat. You get rid of this by tracking identity of objects that make sure that you only have one,

Joscha Bach 13:38
this is an important feature that you are able to select things, as other words to but this attention needs to be controlled. And to do this, you have basically a controller that is part of your own self model the thing that you you are attending from and in order to make that happen, you need to have a protocol memory, that protocol memory, the sequence of events that you attended towards what you can remember, as a past stream of events that you have been aware of. And this enables a biographical memory and the biographical self. So this is what gives unity to your subjective experience that you are the same being as you use thinking over yesterday or a moment before. This enables a particular kind of learning. Our brain is not a layer by layer architecture in which you can pipe training signals will hold all the layers and hope that all the errors cancel each other out until you get to the right point, instead uses a different mechanism. What we seem to be doing is that we make a decision beforehand for learning where we want to make a change. Imagine you want to get better at tennis. So you decide today, I want to make my opponent slightly more like this. And as a result, I expect to go the ball like that. And eventually I'm going to win the match hopefully. So you need to store a partial binding state of your brain together with the expected outcome and the change that you're making. And later on when you'd win or lose the match, you can recall The situation, you instantiate this partial binding state and then you apply the reinforcement signal. And as a result, you get better or not. So this interesting learning algorithm requires that you have a model of your own architecture that you know how you work. And this means that you have to train this attentional system, how you do is you do this with the attentional system itself. So you will also sometimes toward the fact that you attended to something in your attentional system to get better at attending, which makes attention reflexive. If you do this, not with a time delay, like in tennis, but if you do this on a mental representation, you change your mental visitation, you see the how the result plays out, this is an actual system, you have something that you would call reasoning, which is why reasoning is usually conscious, it's something that you need to attend and use directly see the changes that you're making to your mental representation, and undo them or reinforce them. So basically, in this model, we have an environment and body is the primary model, the reality that we perceive is not the physical world, it's a dream generated by our neocortex only. Unlike in the night, it's not dissociated from sensory events during the day, it's tuned to predict sensory experience. And this reality that I'm immersed in is not the physical world. It's really a dream generated in the neocortex. And my declarative knowledge, the things that are thinking about our secondary model, it's a model of what I'm doing. And this is, for instance, this primary model is often very complicated mathematics. If you see a toddler sitting on the floor, and she folds a piece of paper and pushes the pencil it what this toddler is doing, she is proving theorems about embedded surfaces in the Euclidean space. And these are not trivial theories. So they you have to make an experiment to figure this out. But the toddler has no language to talk about this. And only much later, when you learn some elementary mathematics, you are able to learn the language, it is so precise that you can save what experiment you have actually been conducting in that moment. And the self is a model of that thing that is making these models. It's a tertiary model. And this self is of course, not a physical thing, it is a story that the brain tells itself about a fictional person. So the conductor maintains an attentional protocol, which is an gives rise to a narrative about yourself and the access to this protocol gets integrated into the protocol. And another fraction to remember that you have been conscious, and the member of having been conscious is necessary and sufficient for consciousness. So I think that this availability of mental stimulation to the conductor is the necessary and sufficient condition for Access Consciousness. And the integration of that access into the accessible for the call is necessary and sufficient for the surf report about awareness. And the self report about the memory of awareness is being interpreted as the event is an actuality. And you're not actually aware of things, there is a large time delay between the physical events that cause you to experience something and your actual experience. And it's not a shift of time delay. It's not just that you live in a time shifted universe, but you have the sense that you act on your stimuli by the happening. So when I stub my toe, and I act on this, I have the impression that I do this, in actuality, I do this instantaneously. And of course I don't. This is a thing that is constructed after the fact I really live in this narrative generated in my brain.

Joscha Bach 18:20
So we can now bring these things together the idealism, if you live in a dream generated by a mind on a higher plane of existence, yes, totally, the mind of the higher plane of existence is the existent discard of a primate and a physical universe. And so we basically now bringing these different perspectives together with computational doesn't mean we notice, we've been basically talking about the same thing all along, we just know fixed our ontology, we now know how to point at these things. And I think the confusion disappears. So, I think that non computational conceptions of reality are incoherent, because they cannot be properly expressed in a language that is not self contradictory. If you want to reason about a thing you need to express it in a language that does not have contradictory. So you need to have computational language, constructive mathematics, physical systems cannot be conscious. Some people think that only physical systems are, can be conscious and simulations cannot have it backward. physical systems cannot be conscious the brain is a physical system cannot do such a thing. But it would be very useful for the brain what it's like to be a person. So it creates a simulation of a conscious being. And we happen to be that simulation to some electron, and it gets access to language center, and here we are talking to each other. We have no access to the physical reality, we cannot escape the dream generated by our monadic brains. And I think that the consciousness that didn't have our type of consciousness is necessary side effect of attentional learning. And I suspect that machines that don't use this kind of attentional learning will not be conscious in our sense. Thank you

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai