Unknown 0:05
Welcome to the naked Ella podcast. This is episode 25. We are honored to have your Shabbat here with me, I've looked up to you for months now since we interacted on covers, I've been going through your work. I've been religiously following the Society of mind. Discussions we also do in the morning gives me a lot of perspective, from an empirical viewpoint. As soon as it's the sort of pseudo esoteric and exoteric mind that I have myself, it gives me a good way to functionally see things. It seems as if every scientist of some sort or everything, God has a model or theory of everything. I recently heard that Eric Weinstein came with geometric unity. And it seems to be his, you know, work for the world. And I was wondering whether you also have because you're so renowned and so honorable, I was wondering if you have a theory of everything for the universe, or if you're still working on it. And if you plan to not publish something, simply because it couldn't be a subjective tearing of experience, or theory of everything.

Joscha Bach 1:15
I suspect that everybody has to have something like a theory of everything, even if they're not consciously aware of it, they need to have some kind of integrated model of the universe. And in many people, I think it's an indexical model where they have basically all that perception going on. And then they address point at the structure of their perception without having a second order understanding of how this structure is made up. And then there are some people which don't really trust their perception. And so they try to go to first principles to understand how the perception works on one side, and on the other one, how systems that can generate patterns that we can perceive and make sense of might work. So what could be the possible structure of the physical universe that we are part of, and this already now, almost presupposes some kind of metaphysics or the way in which I dissected the relationship between observer and universe. But as we all are aware of the space of possible theories there. Difference between Eric and me is that I think Eric has the sense that he is one of the few people who actually understand how the universe works. And that must be very frustrating for him. And I don't think that there is anything in my understanding that is very special, it's just that I am pretty stubborn, and have difficulty to believe other people, what they believe about reality, especially since most of them have just pieced it together from things that they heard or read somewhere from people who also don't fully understand it. So a lot of the teaching that I get in school and university is basically some kind of mythology that is divorced from the thinking of the people that first came up with the ideas. And in some sense, I like a classical education, I grew up in a cave full of books, and read lots of lots of things, and not always in the right order. And it means that I had to find my own paths into this whole forest of ideas. And when we try to understand an idea, it's crucial that we also understand how this idea was born. So not just what is the gist of a conclusion that somebody drew in the course of their thinking, or learning, or experimentation. But what gave them the idea that this might be the right question to pursue in the first time, you're in the first place? Right? Not just how do you build a radio, but what gives you the idea that you should put this arrangement of parts into motion to see whether it works as a radio. And I found that school never prepared us for this kind of thinking. So the underlying structure of the universe that makes it possible for building a radio and it is not obvious and the things that you learn in school about electromagnetism is not sufficient to get the idea that electromagnetism should be a thing in the first place. Right? How do you discover that? And so I try to get back and recover these ideas. When I figure something out. It's usually noticed that I'm late to the party and the parties get smaller and smaller, in some sense to this is the way in which I can measure my own progress. But it's not that I figured out things that other people haven't figured out. It's just that I noticed that when I read after I figure something out that I can usually pinpoint the corner in the space of ideas that I'm currently exploring. And so when I think about I'm my own epistemology and metaphysics.

Joscha Bach 5:05
When we try to figure out what's the case, the usually only I can do this within closed symbol games that we completely control that is visited mathematics that we can build out by ourselves. And when we explore the outside world, we are in a situation that is similar to someone who looks at a screen and tries to reverse engineer the source code that is behind the screen without being able to open the machine. And also with being very restricted in the interface that they can be using to figure out what's behind the screen. But we can describe what's on the screen is a sequence of states based on the assumption that we somehow are able to maintain memories that are somewhat reliable. So that is something that we cannot completely guarantee. But without the assumption that we are in a universe that can retain memory, or that we implement in such a way that we can retain memory. And there is a way to make these memories reliable to some degree, we cannot model the world at all. And so we ended up with being a world that is made of transitions between states, how can we describe the transitions between states, this is basically a function the state is a set of patterns, we can describe patterns as bits with a bit is a guess no decision, there is always going to be a finite number of bits that can resolve. And there is a way in which these bits are being translated into each other. And I can always find such a transition. And this basically gets me into computational this paradigm of computational ism is just the modern form of mechanism, mechanism being an ancient philosophy that explains that the world is not a conspiracy, but it's made of causally closed systems that at the lowest level are not intentional, there is no agency at the lowest level, it's just machines. And the modern notion of machine is not parts that are extended in space, and push and pull at each other. But it's functions that I can describe that explain consistently how adjacent states of the universe are correlated.

Joscha Bach 7:14
Now, once I have the commitment to a kind of mathematical language that is constructive, I can take a step further and try to understand the role of the observer and the nature of the observer. And the observer could basically be outside of the universe and share an interface with it. But if the observer can influence the universe, then the the observer per definition becomes part of it. And when we think about the observer being implemented outside of the universe, it just means that there is a parallel universe that implements the observer. And you can go up this chain of universes until you get to a common implementation, right? So we get to a description in which there is something that moves the universe along something that Aristotle might have called the prime mover. And we don't know what put this prime mover into the void and made it two things. It's quite embarrassing, right? Why is there something rather than nothing. And the simplest explanation, the ones that takes the fuse bits to encode is that existence might be the default. So everything that could exist might be implemented. And I think to exist means to be implemented, that is realized in such a way that you can describe it as a sequence of states that transition into each other. Now, when we look at what an object is, I don't think that there are objects as such in the universe, the universe is whatever it is, what projects patterns at my systemic interface, so I can make sense of it. That is also the case if I am part of it, and implemented within the dynamics of the universe. So I'm basically a subset of the universe that has properties to make sense of it. And to make sense of it means I make a cohesive model that where I can interpret everything to make such a cohesive model, I cannot model the universe as a whole, I need to take it apart into components that model independently, so they become manageable. I introduced boundaries between parts of my model. And these are the boundaries between things. A thing, again, is a sequence of states, or a state of spaces, which we between the object can transition and the evolution of the object describes some envelope isn't, I want the object to remain to be that object. And if the object ever leaves that envelope, it ceases to be that kind of object. And again, the object is the notion that I introduced my own mind to say this is a human being. For the boundary of the envelope of that human being objectors depends on the context. So for instance, maybe this human being gets traumatized or it undergoes a huge transition or it grows Up until this point, it becomes a different human being, this might be one envelope that had well rounded, but depending on the state space by which I classify this particular human being, or I could also say its remains this human being until it dies, and its body ceases to be a host for a minute. And in that case, I have a slightly different notion of the same object. causality is introduced by the interaction between these objects in totally unitary object, there is no causality there is just a global transition function. But once I described the universe as separate objects, I get the freedom into the object, because into the description of the universe, because I ignore all the other parts, I keep them as being variant at the objects that I look at are my invariants that I keep in my model in my awareness. And then I describe how the evolution of these attended objects changes, once interaction takes place. And this description of the change of evolution based on the interaction with other objects introduces the notion of causality. So it's a necessary aspect of a description of the universe a separate things. And this description of separate things is only valid to a certain degree. That is, at some point, this description of these macro static objects falls apart, because the universe is itself evolving. And this global thing, in some sense, goes out of whack with my models, and the way in which my models less than less describe what the universe is doing corresponds to the notion of entropy that we have, right, the universe is moving along, and the ways in which I discover order and it applies less and less to it, it becomes harder and harder to recover the order, and thereby interact with the universe. Because the reason why we make these models is to solve a control problem that is how to keep the observer stable and to maintain the interaction of the observers in the universe. Right. So once I largely control models,

Unknown 12:10
okay, so you were talking about existence as being this default mode. And so I was wondering, is it sentience within existence? Is it the awareness component within consciousness, which is existence here? Or is it Gaza and just being as existence being default? Because oftentimes, people conflate the word existence with sentience awareness consciousness. So I was wondering what what's existence within this statement of existence being different?

Joscha Bach 12:41
I think that sense of realness is this experiential ability is not necessarily connected to an object existing, because we can experience things that are not implemented beyond the fact that we can experience them, which means they are implemented in the mind is perceptual content. And I'm not quite sure about Heidegger's terminology, so I haven't re digested Heidegger since I read him first, I think I would have to reprise him first, to make sense of his notions and to pin point or translate his ontology into mind, that it doesn't mean that it's wrong. I just don't really know what Heidegger's terms mean, at this point. But when I look at my interpretation of sentience, and consciousness, they're not the same thing. It takes sentience, to be the notion that an observer is aware of its own relationship to the universe, its own existence as an observer, and its own actions and directedness its own intentionality. So it's basically the notion that a system knows what it's doing. And you get to be sentient if the control problem that you have to solve is so complicated, that you need to make a model of yourself and your relationship to the problem that you try to solve. Because this influences the way in which you can solve the problem which you can perceive what the problem is in the first place. The things that will satisfy you about having solved the problem in a particular way, right. All these aspects require you to reverse engineer yourself. This is of course, not related to consciousness. Consciousness is a particular way to experience the relationship that you have to the universe. And the weird thing is that consciousness is to us the primary thing because we are primarily conscious beings. We experience ourselves as conscious beings, we don't experience ourselves as physical beings. For us, physics is a distant mythology. And it's frustrating to me to talk to philosophers who take electrons and particles and all these things as givenness if they've seen them, or if somebody had seen them, right at all, they learned about this in school, they mostly don't really understand what it is, you cannot make any derivation from this, unless you understand what it actually refers to that is the way in which we describe information moves between locations that we can discern in the universe.

Unknown 15:21
You also talked about this observers bias thing, which remind me what the observer is expectancy bias. And it often makes me wonder whether every empirical experiment that scientists or people conduct, whether it always has a subjective bias just just because us as default, assessor observers is a subjective being. So is there always a subjective influence in an empirical data being around being derived from empirical experiment, or it's not,

Joscha Bach 15:55
the subject is not always given SSF itself is a model that you create in your own mind. And for the most part, this model is stable, but it doesn't need to be stable, right, we can put ourselves into a state where there is no observer. This means that you there's no distinction between me and the third person, or no person. That is that is just a model of the universe going on and tracking patterns that this model is entangled with by evolving the things that are being generated in the observing mind. And in this state, believe is not a verb, there is no relationship between itself, that constitutes itself as the thing that believes that it's just the modeling system. And every modeling system is isomorphic properties is going to find the same models, if it has the same entanglements with the system, that it models.

Unknown 16:55
What a slit experiment would purely be analogical, if there is no self that is exploring the particles moving,

Joscha Bach 17:05
South is not exploring anything, the self is this story that's being generated, Patrick cannot do that. It's something that becomes apparent when we start deconstructing the self and playing a little bit visit. And we notice that the self is along for the ride, because it's the way in which the agent makes sense of what it's doing. Right? It's a control model, it allows you to remember what the entire system did at some point, but the self is not the agent. The self is no one. The self is a narrative. And so it itself cannot explore it itself has a recording or recorded, it's not even recording. It's reinvention every time that you try to remember it based on stored cues. And it's able to create the best story that the system can tell about what it did in the past and what it intends to do right now and what it might be doing in the future. It's

Unknown 18:00
always been created a new at each point. Yes.

Unknown 18:05
Okay. So I was wondering, because sometimes I've read that certain arithmetic mutations and scientists and philosophers would often regard geometry as this objective language of the universe upon which everything functions, and during hypnogogic experiences, oftentimes, I get geometrical hallucinations. So I would, I went on internet and I looked at different subjective accounts to see whether everyone was having somewhat the same pattern bass reuse nations, and a lot of people said that they see the exact same lattice patterns, only the Tetris effects, which are supposed to be images from your short term memory and your long term memory seem to be personal to us. So they're subjective, in essence, but these like geometrical hallucinations and quote, unquote, animal imagery that people sometimes see within their hypnagogic experiences seem to be similar across every subjective mind. And so I was wondering whether if we were to make objectively or somehow empirically see this, whether it makes sense that even when we read an altered state of consciousness, from a normal state of consciousness, we still perceive geometry as the sacred language. So I was wondering whether you think this is where the geometry or let's even arithmetics is some sort of universal language, of understanding of symbolism of everything.

Joscha Bach 19:32
I think that mathematics is a symbol game, or all the symbol games. You could also say that mathematics is the set of all languages. And mathematicians start with exploring the simplest ones, the formal languages where everything is well defined. And we'll explore building these languages up into more and more complex things. And yet the languages of mathematics are still fairly simple that it's very hard in them to talk about the world that we experience. And the philosophical languages are typically starting out with natural language. And truth is not very well defined in these languages. So it's very hard to say something in the languages of the philosophers, that is strictly true. In a way, we are trying to close this gap. And right now, I think that the main suspicion is to close this gap, you need to automate the way in which a mind uses natural language. And this could be outside of the realm of the human mind, because it's quite limited. And we might need to have a mind that is, can scale up better, that has more acuity that can prove the properties even of very small minut things. And this could be an AI, right, so in some sense, AI is besides the big important engineering and advancing statistics discipline, it's also a philosophical project. And this philosophical project is about understanding its own nature by explaining it in a constructive language. But it's also the project of unifying philosophy and mathematics by providing the missing link, an automatic mind is developed to find properties. And then we think about how such a system would make sense of reality how a language makes sense of reality, we can start out with the systems that for instance, describe number theory, you take something like piano's axioms, can take Boolean logic. And once you make these systems complex enough, they become Turing machines, which means you can make everything into what they are doing. And you can map between all these machines into each other, they're all automotive, it's the same power, you might end up with different representational formalisms. But they turn out to be equivalent at some level, that is, there exists some mapping that you can compute between the different structures that you use for representing a model. And the functions that you use for advancing these different representational states along when you have too many parts to count that, then your descriptions as discrete rules that you could describe as a grammar, where you apply logical operators and so on, are no longer very efficient. And you have too many parts to count, you need to identify high level dynamics that where you can approximate the behavior of the system in the aggregate. So mathematics, you have this, for instance, when you look at numbers, theories, and you'll see where these theories converge. And, in practice, when we have domains have too many parts to count, we look for operators that converge for very, very big numbers, where basically, it doesn't really matter, that you have trillions or hundreds of trillions, or just billions of particles, the behavior is pretty much the same, right. And this is where you have your infinities coming in, it's not possible to actually build an infinity because you can not in finite number of steps assemble infinitely many parts. But you can assemble so many, especially if you are so large and big with respect to the components, if you're made of like molecules or elementary particles,

Joscha Bach 23:14
that basically just taking a spoonful of sand is already too many parts to count for the most part for for most practical purposes that we have, right. So when we describe the behavior of the spoonful of sand, they are beginning to resort to geometrical operators. And geometry is exactly the set of of operators that you can apply on to many parts to count those that work. And the simple geometry takes place on a line, right, so this is equivalent to a number line that is continuous. Instead of discrete number line of integers, we just try to fill in all the gaps. And then we invent operators by which we can shift things around on this line. And if we want to turn this line into a plane, we need to fold it into some kind of lettuce, right. And we can also fold it in a lettuce that in the limit is filling in all the gaps. And it doesn't need to be arbitrarily highly resolved, it just needs to be good enough. So the difference between what we are modeling, and the difference between what we are observing becomes doable, or it's so far that the system is nonlinear in such a way that we cannot track the observations with an arbitrarily high resolution right? When you for instance, try to make a model of the weather, you will end up with something that always is going to be a weather but not necessarily the weather around you because there's too much information that you would need to gather about the weather around you to be able to model it into very far into the future.

Unknown 24:52
So I also had one really good question that I've been thinking about for some time. People keep telling me about this Bayesian brain processing system and how it supposedly has roots in content theories. And I was wondering, and I think honestly, it also has really good paper about the cybernetic brain, where where he tends to explain the Bayesian processing paradigm that was wondering what are your thoughts on the Bayesian brain and whether it's an actual good predictive processing model that can be utilized in the contemporary theoretical work, if any.

Joscha Bach 25:30
Bayesian ism basically says that, once you have a theory, and you have new evidence, how do you need to update the theory to accommodate the evidence, and I find attempting to use this principle in school. So instead of checking whether your student has sucked up to you, and is able to reproduce every word that you said, or believes every theory that you threw at the student, based on what the student knows, before they entered the class, and the evidence that you present them in the class, how far in which direction, how much have they updated their theories, and that should not be too little. And not too much. There is one way that is basically exactly the right way. And that is the idea of Bayesian ism is the idea of the Bayesian brain is probably somewhat tautological. If we find systematic deviations from how the brain updates based on the information that's being presented from this mathematical idea, that cannot be explained by, say, physical limitations of the brain, or biases that had to be introduced by social constraints. For instance, your state building species that has the benefits more from working in lockstep than getting things right, maybe there are systematic biases in our cognition that make our brain less than be Bayesian. But outside of this, I think evolution should converge on something that is updating in the optimal way. And Bayesian ism is some sense of mathematically derived limit, in which way the system should update its models when presented with new evidence. I'm not sure to which degree Cantus actually influenced the thinking of modern cognitive scientists, I do think that Kant was a cognitive scientist. But his writing is abysmal. If you written in German, as you notice, that is writing like a bad quarter, it's spaghetti code, there are very few useful comments in his code, he just pushed all the insights that were necessary for him into this language, and acid into longer and longer sentences. And very few people were able to actually parse this in the right way. And this turned Kent into the Nostradamus of cognitive science. That is, he makes all these enormous prophecies, and these prophecies are correct, but only in hindsight. So once you have some understanding of a domain, you can go back to Canada and pinpoint where he figured it out or most of it out. But I not aware of that much work where somebody read Candace, a student, and then sit down and vote some computational model or developed a paradigm in cognitive science that move them along. Instead, in philosophy, it has created a few communities of people that who can exegesis from different perspectives. And the people that invest into reading can typically don't get to the point where they become Neo Kantian, and insert themselves into the current discourse as Cantiones. But rather, it's it becomes an insular thing, where they are part of a certain kind of school, and in have invested most of the theory into a particular kind of interpretation of a particular thinker. I really think that like Vidkun, Stein, and it's who has done a lot of harm to philosophy, because for those of us who didn't understand what computers were which Vidkun, Stein understood before Turing, apparently, before they existed, which is a really big thing, right? You can understand Turing, and Vidkun. Stein, once you understand all these ideas of a computer, but before you do, and especially when you try not to understand them and stay out of all this weird discourse that these nerds are having over there, you are bound to interpret this in the wrong way. And so led to this linguistic turn in philosophy and ordinary language, philosophy and so on, I think that have harmed the field. And similar things might have happened with Kent, but the good thing is Kent is that he seems to be less accepted. above on the surface then Vidkun Stein, so he hasn't been doing that much harm. People couldn't just could not read them.

Unknown 30:12
Yeah, I mean, you grew up, I suppose you grew up in Germany. And, of course, German philosophy is just massive and West and just amazing to exhaust. And I was wondering when people read that, say, a text in German as opposed to a translation in English? Do you often think that the words that the German philosophy core attacks are able to interpret are often misinterpreted in the English ones? And maybe that's why sometimes people have hard time understanding German idealists, or German philosophers, or let's say even any other language, French philosophers just because of the language gap or the problems of translation. Yes.

Joscha Bach 30:56
When I was at MIT, I often ended up sitting behind a very smart Jewish guy who had been with the MIT for a very, very long time. I won't say his name, because maybe he doesn't take what I want to say to him because he has just read a monograph and said that the Americans have always mistranslated the German word Zilla is mind. And I told him, this is obviously correct. But it also makes sense because they have no soul. Yes. No, burn, you're at the stake.

Unknown 31:42
There's actually the the German word for understanding is the understanding as well, which to me as a concept in mind plays a fundamental role, at least from a phenomenological standpoint.

Joscha Bach 31:59
From a linguistic structure, English and German are not that far apart, right? English, in some sense, is a bastardized German. That is a little bit weird, because it has outrun its spelling, right, the pronunciation in American English is very far from the way it's being spelled, which has created some weird effects. And there's also a strange thing that happened to the vocabulary, there is a higher degree of Latinization in the vocabulary than in German, which seems to indicate that the civilization that was invaded by the Romans did not have notions of many of these words, and has not reinvented itself. So in some sense, you have an everyday vocabulary, or you have English words that are mostly comedic words that are still in use. And then everything that has to do with slightly more complicated things like legal aspects, mental things, words, like consciousness, sentience, and so on. All these words are born from that, that that is a VAT. But apart from that, in terms of the grammatical structure of the language, in terms of the metaphors that are being used, it's not that hard to translate between English and German, I think. So it's more of a cultural difference. Sometimes that comes into play, when understanding things the way things are being approached, the pioneering spirit of American English and American thinking, this willingness to understand everything from a fresh perspective, and throw away everything that might have existed in a certain space, and try to see if you can reconstruct it. And there's also, of course, the issue that Germany has lost its mind at some point. I think that was the November revolution. The funding of the universities in Germany had changed. That is it was no longer the kings who had oversight over the universities and weeded out the way in which thinking was being funded and selected interesting minds. But it was turned into a rule based system, it was now decided, by committees, what would be researched. And so in some sense, Germany became somewhat brain dead and things that happened until the 30s was almost like a headless chicken running along based on the momentum that it already had, but more or less lost over time. And then this, this big disaster of fascism happened in Germany. And fascism was not interested in the cultures that existed before it. It saw them as things that were just a distraction, or an aberration or something that was even alien to the thing that I wanted to build. So there was an idea to build a new way of thinking for everything that should be efficient and optimal, and everything else that existed before that had to be be sterilized and burned down. And this led to the exile or the eradication of many of the most important thinkers in Germany who happen to be Jewish. And also for the existing German thinkers, there was only a monoculture permitted that was compatible with the relatively vulgar philosophy of fascism. And after fascism, had run its course, and led into a big catastrophe for not only the Germans, but primarily also for those around Germany. And it came to its big crash, Germany was divided. And the western half as we all know, was basically rebuilt by the elites. And Germany was indoctrinated with a very sort of humanism. And the most edgy thing and types of philosophy that came out of this humanism was Habermas, it's not that interesting. And Eastern Germany was even worse off because they became dialectic materialists, which was a vulgar,

Joscha Bach 36:11
Marxist philosophy, which meant that every idea had to be evaluated with respect to how well the author recognize the role of the working class. And the historical determinism that had to pervade everything. It's not too dissimilar to some things that currently happened in the US with a different ideological meaning. And it's a very depressing thing when this happens to academia and academia and academic thinking, is not able to preserve corners of thoughts, where you can think clearly. And so all this deeper hermeneutical traditions, in some sense, got lost in Germany and became popularized. And there were some corners of analytic thought that were left that basically only on the surface pretended to be compatible, this ideology, and below that were more mathematical. But it was a relatively small community. And so I think that, since fascism, there was not that much coming out of Germany, in terms of philosophy was a little bit of a cybernetic movement. That was interesting, the 1970s and that coincided largely with the cybernetic movements in the Soviet Union in the US. Also, seven, cybernetics burned out. And since since this thing happened, most of the German philosophers were actually I think, American philosophers. Most of the German thinkers, so to speak German American, not yet but not necessarily, genetically or culturally German. It was the intellectual traditions that existed in Germany, I think we're more or less pursued in the US because they still maintained a space, this liberal space of thought in which these theories could be developed and exchanged.

Unknown 38:02
So what would you say were some of your favorite German philosophers it's a growing up.

Joscha Bach 38:09
When I grew up, I think it was I think it was kind of really enjoyed kind and later, I also, like Spinoza, I don't think that he qualifies as German philosopher. I think that Leibniz is great, but he's so full of himself, it made him quite inaccessible to me when he was younger, I liked the maverick like laboratory better. And its laboratories thinking is not that deep and away, but it's correct. And he was willing to go against the authorities. And this is something that I like about him, and people still see him as the fool today, even though this thinking has prevailed.

Unknown 39:00
Yeah, oftentimes, when people that

Joscha Bach 39:02
aren't as great, okay.

Unknown 39:06
Yeah, no, I was going to say that, oftentimes, going back to the Bayesian brain question, people often talk about this category theory where the craft has nodes as object and somehow it deals with object relations. I was wondering, Is that also a relevant paradigm model to use? Or it's another theoretical theory because I come from like, I'm not that aware of the technicalities of of this thing, but I often questioned that relevance of different theories and whether somehow I can also theoretically implied in my own creativity, or like in my own creative philosophy for exploration. So I was wondering, would you consider category theory, which is gaining some sort of advice currently, as having some sort of a usefulness or being good model of objects really? Since

Joscha Bach 40:01
it's just a way to systematize, the language that we are using, especially in computer science, to talk about how objects are being constructed and the relationships between them. And I think it's a useful movement that is unifying, separate fields of modeling. It's probably not that useful to, to use it before you have the need for it. So I would suggest that you think about in the beginning how to model reality at all, and to really start building your own models app of how you model. And at some point, you stumbled on geometry. So for instance, you need space. Because if you don't live in a space, you probably cannot build observers like ours. So it's not surprising that we find ourselves in something that looks like space. But space by itself, I noticed this as a child didn't make sense to me, because it didn't know how to make it, it didn't know how to make a continuous space, because it's not computable, it's not constructive, it's not hard to make something that looks a lot like space. And the easiest way to make something that looks a lot like a space is to take some kind of letters, that is a set of locations that are discernible, that can store state, and ways in which this information can travel between them. And if you make this very regular, and you can end up with a structure, where information becomes local in the sense that there is a regular lattice of a certain dimensionality, for instance, two dimensional or three dimensional or four dimensional in which the information can travel. And then you can start deriving the way in which the thing can be represented at scale. So how can you group these locations, and this is how you get to geometry. And when you preserve, for instance, the relationship that all the components have to each other, you have solid objects, if you are preserving the volume, only then you have liquid objects. If you preserve a ratio between the volume and the pressure, then you have gaseous objects, right. And this is how you come up necessarily to the ways in which we in physics, describe the way information travels through this space, even though the space is probably just existing approximately, there also mathematical notions of what you can make in a space. For instance, you cannot tie a knot in two dimensions, right, try to have a string of paper and a string of threat and you have it on your table. And you try not to lift it off the table, you cannot make a knot, because it would need to cross thread needs to cross itself. But you cannot do it two dimensions, you can do this in three dimensions. In four dimensions, you cannot make a knot from a piece of thread because it will not want stay tangled, you can always pull it and there's always going to be one dimension. More verbiage, it can untangle itself, right, this leads to a very interesting conclusion, certain structures will only be stable in 3d and can only be formed in 3d. And this might be responsible for the mutations of this type. But we find ourselves as observers in the 3d space, it's probably not an accident. But the spaces that can be constructed at all and the space that can work at all and the ways in which an observer could make models of these spaces, they are limited by the mathematics that can be constructed. And you can explore this entire space. When I was a kid, I didn't have much access to mathematics, it was very difficult for me to enjoy doing mathematics and I blame the way in which I was introduced to it. I didn't have mathematics teachers that were mathematicians. Mathematics is in a way, taught as if imagined you would teach music without ever hearing the sound of a musical instrument and you would never play an instrument and you would never make a song and never sing right? Music is about the ability to sing and create a construct songs and to understand them and understand what you're doing, then you build it up from singing or from making sounds and enjoying them. And imagine you just get introduced to notation. And you learn how to manipulate this notation and pay grade eight you can translate from chromatic scales into each other, but you have no understanding what it's good for. And then only the most difficult one scattered the Conservatorium where they learn how to play the big masters. And there's only a handful of people which is allowed to compose. And this is the way in which we deal with mathematics. And it's it's insane, right?

Joscha Bach 44:48
Doesn't make a lot of sense. And also, it's mostly taught by rote learning, which doesn't work for me because I get bored too easily. I need to make something I need to understand the structure and So it was very easy for me to learn how to code. I'm completely self taught in this regard. And I started in a time where computers for became just accessible in the early 80s. So I didn't have programs to work with. And so I bought my own programs for first 2d graphics, and then 3d graphics. And I needed to figure out how to represent objects in space inside of the computer, it was all relatively straightforward and easy to build up. And I always had such big respect for the mathematicians that would have extremely complicated theories to represent space in the right way. And then I looked at the stuff and I realized, oh, no, the people that did computer graphics just reinvented a lot of the measurement metrics without Greek letters, because they, they were not part of the ASCII code with which we type this stuff in. So it's, there is only so many ways in which you can make sense of space in which you can describe surfaces in low dimensional spaces, and interact with them. And it turns out that our brain probably has discovered similar mathematics at some level. So our brain is best understood as some kind of a game engine that is tuning itself to track the patterns on your retina, to construct a three dimensional space with a limited resolution. And vision is a sense that combines stuff in a low dimensional space moving around, right? Efficiently computable geometry, with textures, the texture is not really spatially resolved, the texture just is a type of surface that is abundant in a certain region in that space. And then you have colors, which are stationary dimensions. And this is combined, it's dynamic. This is what you call vision. And this is what 80% of our brain is doing. And so when you describe the geometric patterns that you see in certain mental states, this is just a result of that game engine being decoupled from your sensory input, and then running free and being modulated along with your parameters. And some of these parameters are quite distinct. So for instance, there are the people patterns that are characteristic for the art of a certain Amazonian tribe to see people, they put this onto ceramics and weave it into carpets, tapestries, and describe is also using iOS. And the iOS car users all know this pattern, because it's a very characteristic thing that happens to their visual cortex, when they take ayahuasca and this closed eyes have visualization of these visualizations tend to be overlaid with the same patterns, which means that when you mess up your cell to note that sense, sensor, and receptors in a very particular way, using combination of DMT and Harmelin, that is only be found in ayahuasca, then you get these very specific interference effects in your visual cortex. And they only happen with Ayahuasca in this particular way, apparently, and would be very interesting to make computer simulations. And I suspect if you can really recreate these patterns, we learned something about the architecture of the visual cortex.

Unknown 48:16
to I think there was one apple co founder if I'm not mistaken, who became a Zen Buddhist, and then founded this therapy called AI LSD, which is intentional lights of therapy, which use like this mechanical lamp sort of object to project some sort of blue light, which has its own properties onto words. Yes, and it's supposed to activate your pineal gland and try to induce some of the same DMT like, which was without taking DMT. Now, I don't know exactly how, how precise it might be in inducing those visual hallucinations. But I think we can definitely come up with new computational models, which can replicate if anything, those same experiences with using technology as opposed to, let's say, using medicines, which if use an excess could be harmful. Do you think if we like make some sort of technology, let's say, which can give you the same phenomenological experience and the same sort of visuals would you think get that would also have some sort of depreciating effect on on physiology and mentality or, or have some sort of quote unquote, addictive properties at as these compounds, chemical structures would have?

Joscha Bach 49:37
I think this technology already exists. It struck me when I read two sets of consciousness conferences and related events. There is this community of people pitch used pulse light, and sounds like binaural sounds and so on. To induce trance states. It's basically flashing patterns you lay down you have the glasses on that insulate you from ambient light. And then they produce light with certain frequencies and arrangements. And your visual cortex is supposed to get and trained visit until you have certain experiences. And then I thought, oh my god, what if we use structured light, that is not just passing in a certain frequency, but is using much more detailed structure and trains itself with the patterns of your visual cortex, and then goes into the rest of your brain and uses a trance state in which you experience an alternate reality. And this technology exists, it's called movies. And it's also addictive, right? There's entire industry that is focused on producing one and a half hour trips that are completely optimized for the right that people are going through and same trip gets boring. So people need a new trip, like every month, at least. And let's make them right, it's three, an entire industry that produces trips using structured lights that in trains itself is the visual cortex to produce a trend state that produces almost arbitrary experiences and insights and epiphanies. And right in the human mind, this is the closest that you can get the what this thing is not doing is it's not directly affecting you, at the level of experience, whether self was being constructed, it's possible. So there are some movies which go deeper into transplanters cuts, he was I think, was the first one that I saw in this regard as a child, or is 15 year old. And most movies do this in a slightly less direct way. So there is a way in which you're allowed to disentangle yourself from the movie and sandbox the experience. But it's arguably not entirely the case, for instance, for horror movies, which are a genre that has been designed to make it hard for you to disentangle yourself from it right, it's about manipulating the experience itself is suspect and experiencing this detachment from the outside reality and being thrown in an alternate one that is intense enough for you to not be able to escape it. And now we also have we are and we are is arguably still somewhat of a novelty, and it's in its infancy, it's good enough. Now if you use a quest, it's easily catapulting most people into an alternate reality that they can no longer sandbox. So when you are balancing on some cliff in VR, it's very hard to escape the sensation that you're indeed, looking down at intense abyss that is going to crush you if you lose your footing. You are muted.

Unknown 52:49
Yeah, I feel like with the advanced technology and the we are and everything, we already get to have this sort of immersive experience, in the sense that our physiological body exists here. But we're still somehow within the immersive experience of this virtual cyberspace. And it's been like it's been advancing super fast. We see concerts and using high level virtual reality to make their audience more immersed into the experiences. And now when we look at let's say, from an AI perspective, or Ray Kurzweil perspective of this, the we should probably not be doing this at some point. We as physiologically we will be way more effective. And mentally, we will just be existing within the cyberspace and within the compounds of the cyberspace. And I guess that's what Daniel Dennett also emphasizes on the machine never give human consciousness to machine intelligence, like why not use AI robots in AI systems as just objects, which they are, like, why, why feel the need to give these cold, robotic cognitive architectures, some sort of emotional element or some sort of sentience, if anything, to make them more than what our use apparently seems to just, you know, lie to that. And I was wondering whether you think that this whole concept of bathrooms ASI, or this transhumanism, that comes out of neural link, supposedly, do you think that we're in terms of AI, we're moving towards a hopeful future, or more of a dystopian tech infused future that Ray Kurzweil would often describe it as, and we're probably moving towards some sort of tech infused dystopian civilization, which is often interpreted in science fiction film. So one can always

Joscha Bach 54:48
if you look at local status are species of grasshopper or small set of species of Grasshopper that have two modes, one where there are relatively few of them and they Part of the normal ecosystem. And if they reach a certain density, something flips, and they go into locusts mode in which they swarm and eat up all the fields around them. And they replicate very, very quickly and they grow more and more and faster. And I suspect when you are a locust, you are in a manic state. And you are extremely optimistic with respect to the future of local soon, everything in the universe is going to be locusts and you're going to go to other planets, and it's going to be awesome. And it's probably best almost right before it's over, because there's going to be an exponential doubling. And, of course, it doesn't end well. Right, you are going to eat up the fields, and you are a blight. And I think that from the perspective of life on Earth, humanity is a blight. You're not killing life on Earth, it's almost impossible to sterilize a planet, once it's been thoroughly infected with life. But we are reducing the complexity of life on the planet. And we do depend on complexity of life on the planet to survive. The minutes are not very long lived species, all our cousins species are basically extinct. The only large four minute was left in numbers. And we haven't been around for all that long. 20 million years ago, our ancestors were basically squirrels. And this might not be around for many millions of years, we might be around in the present form, maybe just for a few 1000s years on every few not very lucky for just a few decades. And I don't know, I think this idea of transhumanism, I like it, it's sweet, it's endearing, it's adorable. And it would be nice if it was true. And I like this idea that you can go to space, but I don't think it would be very efficient to set monkeys into space. Can you really imagine that there is a starship enterprise that is in 1000 years from now debating who whom to marry and whom to have affairs with rather, and how to organize diversity in the workplace and how much sugar to put into your drink. But it's, it's almost as ridiculous as the foundation stories by Asimov or you have 1950s Americans smoking cigarettes, or pipes, millions of years in the future and perpetuating the 1950s American culture. It's it's not very realistic, I think that far future AI is going to be nothing like human aesthetics, if, or future intelligences. There, it's going to be very different from us and be able probably not relate to these aesthetics, and human aesthetic or a particular kind of ecological niche. And it's a niche that we are outgrowing. And if we are destroying the ecology in which we can exist in meaningful way as human aesthetics, then the question remains, what are humans for? Why would we need to be bipedal apes, and five should be identified as being bipedal apes, if we are completely transforming life on earth into something that is beyond recognition, which doesn't contain large animals anymore, and this is already the case, right? If you capture any kind of land animal that is larger than rabid, it's probably a cow or human. There's almost nothing else left. And also, plants are entering some kind of monoculture, large land plants, and so on. So there is going to be a shift in the ecosystems. And it's not clear if if you fit in after this shift has been finished, and could be that you have only so many years left of a technological civilization. But on the other hand, it is so beautiful to be part of that to be part of this giant explosion of intelligence, and consumption of Nick entropy. It's such an amazing party. It's such an amazing fireworks, there was never a point where a species was so comfortable and very, it was so sentient and could do so many things. And one of the things that we can do is we can teach the rocks how to think, possibly better than us. We can make them conscious, more conscious than us, and we can talk to them. Isn't that amazing? Shouldn't it be something that you try before we are done?

Unknown 59:35
Yeah, we have to squeeze out all that we can possibly left. I can circle back to a question that I had in relation to your stance on the implicate order or reality or at the implementation in existence or of existence. How does that relate to permanent ease in Heraclitus, and is it fair to say that they have This think models at all, or they simply miscommunicating.

Joscha Bach 1:00:05
They don't know that. So I haven't read enough of the original material that's left. And I suspect that most of the original material is gone and has been translated several times. And most of the stuff I only read as secondary literature, for instance, I noticed when I read Aristotle, that most of what Aristotle has written has been re translated by the Christians at some point, and mapped onto a Christian metaphysics that then was re translated into the post enlightenment metaphysics. And it's hard, basically, to recover the original intent of the thinking, I guess, that Aristotle gets everything right to about 80%. For instance, he has mistakes in the way he defines formal logic that have been repaired later by Tarski, and so on. But it's good as an introductory reading in many ways. And as a thinker, he gets more things right than many of the contemporary philosophers, which is depressing also, because it shows how limited our ability is to make progress in philosophy, every generation finds itself in the same situation that it needs to reconstruct everything. And you're not always put onto the right trajectory to start with.

Unknown 1:01:19
True to like that there is a problem with translation and transliteration I usually have when, whenever reading, you always seem to wonder whether this is this was the original intent as you as you said, I was also wondering, since we had a conversation about psychoanalysis before, what do you think about like, what is your perception about psychoanalysis as a whole, maybe the Freudian model, maybe the youngin model, maybe psychoanalysis just as a whole, as being an empirical man, what do you think of psychology and psychoanalysis?

Joscha Bach 1:01:53
I think that psychoanalysis is not so much scientific theory, as it is a philosophy. And I as a philosophy, I think it's pretty good. The problem is that psychology itself is largely a theoretical, has not developed a methodology by which we can derive models on how the mind works. And this means that there is a big gap between clinical psychology and theoretical psychology or research, scientific psychology, the psychology that is being done in the lab, largely doesn't apply to anything that people do when they give therapy. And the models that you have to be using as a scientist. And it's not only to for psychology, but sadly also for other disciplines are different from the things that you can really publish about. Because our science is set up in such a way that you can publish the things that you can prove. Or that you can prove within the constraints of a given method or mythology, which doesn't mean that it's a mathematical proof. But it's basically something that you can sell a sound science. But the interesting questions are not being answered in the domain of what you can prove, but in the domain of what's possible, right? If something is complicated, you can very often not prove your understanding. But you're operating with a system of so many interdependencies that make give you a consistent model, but you cannot necessarily track all the connections in this model, and find evidence for the existence. The reason by the psychoanalyst beliefs, many of the components of this theory is not because he hasn't experiment or knows of an experiment that has ever validated them. But because the interdependence of these features makes it possible to reconstruct symmetries to explain why something is the case. And this allows you to get a handle of the system that you're operating with. And difficulty is for me, if people take Freud and take him, for instance, as gospel that the thing that Freud had access to revelations that are not accessible to the model scientist or the model, psychologist, that's probably not correct. So I think it's a good idea to read all these theories steppingstones to build your own understanding of the system that you're looking at. And, in the absence of a better theory, use the body of theories that is available to you to interpret the mind of a person that is sitting in front of you, and how to interact with it. Right. So don't take these models as ultimate depiction of reality and check whether they're useful, and I think that Freud has created some very useful theories. Just as soon as you are taking the theories as something that has to be true, because Freud said, you are setting yourself up for possible failures. Sure,

Unknown 1:04:46
good to have this distinction, and goes to the point of the distinction within German and others have been recently investigated more of what is the science that go to what to promote instead of the enlightenment science and the distinctions between good mood and sin, which are similar words to describe cognition in German. As far as I'm concerned, the mood is more aligned with feeling and imagination, and sin is intellect. So the Freudian project is more of Goethe, Indian science, and that the scientific process sort of starts with a hypothesis and then proves and as it goes on, more or less, so the value of that sort of Sciences, the the role of the scientists not as this immortal revelator, but as someone who is deeply ingrained in the in the practical, or in the practice itself, of the science. So, I mean, to your point of almost that all models in psychoanalysis, although valuable, valuable, lack a correspondence with reality, may be correct. But, you know, when we start in psychoanalysis, I, at least lately have been coming from more of a Lacanian background, we start with the assumption that the unconscious exists, and that it's sort of we're not as an ontological thing. But it's, it's an ethic, the ethic of the scientist is to begin with the assumption that there is this known unknown. And in the case of psychoanalysis, you know, the only rule really within the axiomatic or the or the science to follow is to believe in the unconscious. So, I don't know to what extent that's a model, or just a way of practicing science and a way of reaching those conclusions that we haven't reached otherwise.

Joscha Bach 1:06:43
So I would start out with deconstructing the notion of belief here. What does it mean to believe something? Is it a commitment that is going to diminish you if you were to give it up? Or is this just a space of series that is productive to explore? And yeah, so I think the former notion is problematic to me. Because it means that if you were confronted with a theory that explains the same phenomena better, and you feel diminished, if you adopt the theory, you're less likely to be truthful. And so as a scientist, I would reject the identification, just the content of my theories, shows there's a very brittle vector, as soon as you add other vectors into the model, like things that you prefer to be true, and that you negotiate the facts against, you're not going to end up with truth, as soon as the going gets more complicated. So to me, I think that when we have several possibilities in front of us, we don't have the freedom to choose one, we have to remain agnostic. And we also have to quantify our agnosticism, which means we have to measure the weight of the evidence for the different theories. And so for instance, when you think about the mythologies that we are sometimes presented with, for instance, the idea of a sentient creator being that produces physics, based on the evidence that is being written in the book and propagated by powerful institutions of people that are very, very certain. Right, what is the evidence for that being true? I cannot, on first principles, rule out that it's true, right? Because I don't know how I could make a mathematical proof that it's impossible.

Joscha Bach 1:08:29
But it's, it's a space of theories that are not going to cut myself off from there is a path into the space of theories, there's just no possible evidence for this hypothesis, which means I have zero confidence in the theories being true. And this is the way I tried to relate to this. Now with respect to the unconscious, the question is, for me, is this unconscious, loaded up this meaning, that is invisible to me, that we have this powerful pull towards symbols, you know, who's very below the obelisk, you know, you know that it's always you, you are the chosen one, there is this deep meaning that is calling out to you that tells you that the universe is actually about you, the universe is your consciousness, coming into existence of everything that happens here is the state in which we enact every person is hand puppets from our own godly perspective, right? I think this is explainable, how we would get to these perspectives, and we can have lots of theories about them, but does not necessarily believe in any of them. That doesn't mean that we have to reject them. You can just look at them, you can examine them, you should not have emotions about them. And this emotion, the sense of right, the sense of Epiphany, this sense where your pupils dilate because you are connected to your source of meaning. This is the opposite of the state of sobriety that we need to strive for when we look for truth. It doesn't mean that we have to reject any of the theories. It just means that We examine them without any emotion. We just look at them as models. And then we see where does this model get us? What is the evidence that supports this model? What are the predictions that you can make from this model? Could this be the case? What would be the implications? So for me, the unconscious is a very boring notion in a way, there are stuff that I consciously attend to. And the things that I don't attend to I'm not conscious of them. And the theory that when I'm not conscious of them, they don't exist in my mind is apparently counterfactual, because apparently, my mind does lots of things while I'm not looking. Right. So of course, most of my body my mind is doing is unconscious. It also turns out that many of the operations that take place in my mind, and not accessible to the kind of operators that my consciousness needs to integrate them into my memories. So basically, don't get into my low level perception. Because my consciousness is not able to dissect the processes that produce low level perception, arguably, there is possibly no way to make such things. The conscious thing is just models, right models of the model making. So the brain doesn't know what it's like to be itself to be in a certain state doesn't mean that you know that you are in the state and what it's like to be in that state. It's a secondary model, right? It's part of your mind, guessing what other parts of your mind are doing. And everything that's outside of this domain is necessarily not going to be subject to the sphere of what's conscious. And so yes, of course, everything, almost everything is unconscious. And the things that are in your consciousness are constructs that explain the surface level for learning and later investigation. And most of what we access with our conscious mind is analytic, which means it's grammatical in a way. And all these distributed neural networks that compute most of our perception are inaccessible to these operations, right, we just don't get into it. And we're not able to drive this analytic dissecting arm, into this big forest, of the underlying structures that produce the contents of our perception, most of our mind is perceptual. And it manifests itself at this boundary to our cognition, as feelings as sensors. And this doesn't mean that we can decompose them, we can decompose them, but we probably cannot get into them. So we can build computer models of perception. And the understand increasingly, by these computer models are not suitable for using grammars on them. Because grammars are not efficient to compute them, right? Do you need other structures to do this? Well, basic arithmetic, linear algebra, for instance.

Unknown 1:12:43
I would elaborate I agree with what you say. But the function and also I mean, the risk of clinging on to one model, I think it's clear. The aspect of having a known unknown, however, is something that theology I think, does best, but I think that it's useful, so as an epistemic model, and in the case of Kant, with the noumenon, to me, it seems like the noumenon is this known unknown? And and this is a secondary question, but that is related. Can we assume that, from this unknown, which is for infinitely formed, infinitely alienated? Is there still some degree of information exchange between, in the sense of can this fundamental bedrock of reality have some communicational degree to us or within just the functioning of metaphysics in itself? And the question is more if there's if information is the substratum of the universe and whether it exists in this noumenal world?

Joscha Bach 1:13:57
Not sure if it makes sense to say that information is the subset of the universe, I think it's the basic component of our metaphysics, information is discernible difference, and the meaning of information is its relationship to change and other information. And you cannot have anything more than information about a thing, right? So every concept like electrons are a way to talk about information. Space is a way to talk about information. And all the objects that you're aware of are ways to talk about changes in information. Let's so in this sense, it's meaningless to say that the universe is is information but because we don't know what the universe is, we cannot have information about what it is, but we can make is models that explain how this information processing works. And we can have theories that operate at the lowest level of the manipulation of information. So we know what information processing systems systems that produce change information. principle capable off. And you can deduce that from first principles, but the situation that we are in might be similar to a character living in Minecraft, right you know this game of Minecraft, and there are villagers in Minecraft and now imagine you have some very clever villagers, and they are even implemented in Minecraft in a similar way as you can, for instance make computers in Minecraft and redstone. And the computers that exist in Minecraft they are slower than the computer that they run on because the computer that they're running on is only using very, very small fraction of its capacity to perform the operations of the computer existing inside of Minecraft right. But it's still supervening on all in the same CPU, the entire giant world of Minecraft is all running on some kind of computer in the parent universe. And the characters live in Minecraft can in principle, never know what type of computer they're running on the parent universe. Because this is not a property of the Minecraft that the living in Minecraft is implemented in such a way that it rents the same whether it's on an iPad or on a Mac on a PC doesn't care, right? It's an abstraction. And the only thing that you need is to have a computer that is able to go from state to state in a regular fashion and have enough memory. And once you have that you can implement Minecraft on it. And every of these Minecraft will have exactly the same properties. Because the cost of the clothes level from the perspective of the observer embedded in Minecraft is going to be the world of Minecraft itself, you don't get below that. So you will never know the shape of the machine that Minecraft is being implementing on not the maker of the machine, not the color of the casing of the machine. Right, all these things are unknowable, it doesn't mean that they are fundamentally alien, they are just not, you cannot even talk about the categories, right, you don't know the dimensionality of the system that is outside, you don't know anything about it, you cannot know until it has makes itself known by projecting some kind of feature into your world, that becomes discernible as something of that parent implementation. And there's always going to be stuff outside of that parent implementation. And the only hope that you could have to ever get out of this is if you could solve the question by there something rather than nothing from first principles. Unless you can do this, you will run into this boundary very this is just where you can stop asking because you will get no more information that would give you evidence for any of the alternative theories. Right in this point, you have to remain agnostic. So you have to remain agnostic, if you are living my prophetic one on a Mac on a PC or on something else, you cannot know.

Unknown 1:17:38
Really, you can't even begin to know the the the external world, it becomes the the known unknown that we were discussing becomes an unknown unknown.

Joscha Bach 1:17:50
Yes. So what we can say it seems that our world is capable of running Minecraft, it is capable of going from state to state in a regular fashion, everything makes sense once you start introducing this possibility. And if you don't introduce this possibilities, you cannot make even make models of the world. But you can also not explain the fact but how is it possible that you can apparently make models of the world. So it's relatively cheap assumption to say that this world can be described in a constructive language. And then it turns out that all the other languages don't work to describe systems that that have these properties. And so, we can narrow down this space of theory space to those theories that we can describe in constructive languages.

Unknown 1:18:33
Is there any hope for poetic languages to become this central as a final, you know, humanist approach, this would be very good thing. And Haida Garyun Do we have a hope for our poetic usage of language to in fact, circumvent all of these limits that usual languages allowance for?

Joscha Bach 1:18:56
I think that for ethnic languages, when they are well done, it's harder to write in a poetic language than in a formal language. Because the criteria for when it's good are harder to capture. The the quality of the poetic language depends on the depth of your understanding of the domain and you basically use additional modalities in the language to project your observation onto and the difficulty with Aquatic language that is that it might induce a trance state in which you are no longer able to understand what it's doing to you. So for instance, might induce in emotion that you consider to be correlated to understanding similar to the emotion of forgiveness, right. Forgiveness is, I think two things Either you are writing off a debt, because you realized it's not recoverable. And there is no more very to hold on to the debt. So you will just even this out, and there is no more sense of that there is anything to get in this domain, then you have forgiven the debt. And you might still have the information that you had to forgive the debt. And this might inform your predictions for the future, but the debt itself is forgiven. The other thing is, in slightly different contexts, that you understand what it's like to be the other. And to understand why the other could not act differently. In the circumstance, this doesn't mean that there are not norms that in a different context for somebody else would have prescribed to act in a different way. But given the context in which this particular agent was acting, this was the necessary course of action, this was the way the universe was going to be. And once you understand that, there's also nothing left to forgive. And in both cases, what happens on the exponential level is that the part of your mind that assesses the depth intuitively is going to let go of that notion that there is something that needs to happen before the world is back in equilibrium, right, you create a sense of equilibrium, and the distance to this equilibrium, this injustice is gone. And what some people try to reduce when they try to forgive is they try to induce this emotion directly, without changing the underlying representation that the feeling is indicative of right is a perceptual mechanism that measures the depth. And before you have understood what is actually being measured, you might be tempted to just induce the emotion, the feelings sense by which the perceptual system would signal that there is no more depth. And then the next day, you wonder why the depth is still there, and you actually haven't forgiven, you just induced that emotion. And this also happens a lot in the consciousness industry, when people have existential, dread or pain. And you resolve this existential pain by inducing the right sets of emotion. And it might last for a few days, even or perhaps even weeks, and then it's gone. And it's reverted. And you you need the next session. And it's quite productive for the one who is organizing the sessions. But it's not dealing with the underlying condition. And it's when you consume poetry, it's sometimes hard to understand whether the poetry that you're consuming is true or beautiful. And there is a big danger in poetry that is merely beautiful and not true. Beautiful, poetry isn't using nice emotions, and to poetry is observing in a very elegant way. And the goal of poetry is basically to have this multimodal elegance to use all parts of your available language to capture a certain observation as well as you can. So I think that poetic language is makes sense. But there are two modes in some sense of making sense of reality. And I recently decked out, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance is a metaphor, Robert Perisic describes the difference between what he calls the classic and the romantic mind. And the classic mind is the one that he perceives himself to be a person who understands the motorbike that is riding on as an arrangement of parts that have to function in a particular way. And if the thing makes a particular noise, is a very particular reason and you can fix it.

Joscha Bach 1:23:24
And then he has friends who are smart, well educated and everything. And for them, the motorbike is very amorphous thing that they write on. And when this makes weird noises, you have to go on until the verses get even more weird, and then has to go into the shop. But there is no way to understand what this how this operates. And there is a collection of images that somebody can call it easily as collected of people drawing bicycles. And it's quite hilarious, right, the way that a lot of people are trying to reconstruct the shape of a bicycle. And it's largely not functional, right? How is it possible that minds represent the bicycle in this way? And is this actually the difference between romantic way of thinking and romantic language of poetic languages and analytic languages, where the analytic language captures the structure and elegance and functionality of the bicycle, and the other one is just an arrangement of features that is sufficient to remember that you had this object, right? So I wonder if this poetic language is largely indexical rather than analytic. And this difference between indexicality and analysis means that the analysis has to reconstruct the functional properties of the thing that you're describing. So it's recovered, that you will if you were carrying this analytic observation into a different universe, you can build this object there versus the indexical thing requires the presence of this object in some context that is, can be resolved by just point At the right way, so it's sufficiently disambiguated. And if you want to build a machine learning system is where you would have one that is smart and tries to make a simulation of the universe. And then in the simulation, it identifies for the needs to simulate to produce a certain object a certain thing in the universe. And the other one is just arranging the features like a neural network that is arranging blobs of patterns in the right way. And right away just means I intend to gather. And if you cannot discern the object from others, you improve the discrimination by increasing the resolution of those features. Right? So the poetic language goes into the textures, it goes into the colors, but it doesn't really look at the functional arrangement of the parts.

Unknown 1:25:44
It should, it should but it doesn't it

Joscha Bach 1:25:46
Yes. So it's often a way out. And I find that many of these romantic thinkers are drawn to anti analytic arguments. And this is a big red flag to me. If somebody thinks that girdles proof has somehow shown that mathematics is important, describing reality. And therefore a person who doesn't understand reality doesn't understand mathematics is better equipped to describe reality. Right is very suspicious.

Unknown 1:26:14
Yeah, no, it's use the completed stand by many new age circles nowadays for them, purpose, school ski, he was a Russian foremost, he said that the poet is more preoccupied with arranging images than creating them. So I mean, that says something to the necessity of joining the logistics side and the symbolic side or the indexical side.

Unknown 1:26:38
It's more like an aesthetic appreciation, if anything, that a boy tries to put things in an aesthetic way, or let's say, even an artist, and it gives this deceitful sense of having some sort of a truth, but it's highly delusional, because we think that it's beautiful, we might be able to think we're biased towards thinking it as a capital T truth, which is not, which seems to be also the case with religion. They think that oral tradition is is some sort of true to reality, but it's only a belief system that we that we're accepting, but orthodox religious people would regard this oral tradition, and these beliefs and these texts as as the ultimate truth, which is not rational at all, but that's how they that's how they behave. So it's a belief system, which should be allowed. I wouldn't want to take more of your time. But I have one really good question. For you, do you have a theory of emotions? And what do you think about emotions from a very, like, from the mindset that you have? It's if you're a functionalist, and then you examine emotions? What kind of phenomenological sketch or, or just any sketch do you come up with? And how do you perceive the psychical elements of reality, when you're more inclined towards the objectives of the reality?

Joscha Bach 1:27:58
An emotion is a configuration of cognition, I think. So it's a way in which you relate to yourself and to the world around you. It's not a parameter inside of cognition, it's underlying it. And there's, first of all there are, you could say proto emotional modulators. And these modulators, change the way in which you perceive things in which your cognition works. Some of them are the way in which you evaluate things, valence dimensions, so whether something feels good or bad, whether it's attracting you or pushing you back, but these are some of the valence dimensions also the certainty that you have written with respect to an object, the ability to cope with this object, and so on, the urgency that you perceive, while having to deal with this object, there are all aspects of this space, and there is the dimension of attention, the attention can be deep, in this case, your also tends to be narrow, and it tends to be slow, because you need to recover a lot, a lot of detail. And if the attention is shallow, it gives you faster results at the expense of resolution and acuity. And the attention might be directed on perceptual content, or it might be directed on reflection and cognition. And so it's inward or outward, so to speak. And the attentional parameters together with the valence parameters, put you into a state of in a space of effects. And certain regions in this space of effects have names, right? We call them anxiety, or elation, or joy or bliss. And they are somewhat culture variant because emotions are not natural categories. They're not natural kinds. There are perceptual styles that we extract from the space of ethics that we are in. And then there are more high level emotions, which are distinct things like for instance, jealousy. Jealousy is not just an effect. It's a particular type of negative effect. That Is could be for instance anxiety or fear, which is not quite the same thing, anxiety is more about uncertainty. And the ability to cope with the future versus fear is higher certainty and it has an object. And jealousy requires that you have a need for an exclusive relationship to a partner and to representation that you have this partner and that you might lose it to somebody else. And if any of these elements is absent, you will not be able to experience jealousy. Right, this negative effect is the result of this experience and the anxiety is a description of the necessary effects. So you don't need to build emotion explicitly into the system, what is required to build into the system that has emotion is a set of needs that the system thinks it has or is implemented to have. So it behaves according to these needs, and a set of modulators that adapt the cognition to a given state. And this is all implemented before you're consciously aware of it, this analytic mind is rather late innovation in terms of cognitive systems. Rather, it has to be implemented on a relatively low level that is somewhat autonomous and doesn't require your conscious interference. So, emotions are communicated by the rest of your mind to use symbolic analytic mind by an interface. So a part of your mind that is unable to use language is unable to manipulate symbols in a discreet manner, has to talk to the part of your mind that is largely conceptual and analytic and linguistic, how do you do this, you need to make them accessible as features in a space.

Joscha Bach 1:31:50
Right, and so these valence features and the space where the valence is something like a color, and a feeling of goodness or badness, and then you have feelings of expansion and contraction, and you need to locate them in a space to make them discernible. And the space that we have always available in our own brain that is always instantiated as the body map. So feelings get projected into the body map to make them distinct reason why you feel experience, feelings of social connectedness in your chest region, is not because your heart is required for computing such feelings. It's just a projection to make a discernible from say, existential anxiety, which is lower in the stomach, or feelings of power and competence, which are in the region of the solar plexus, or of social power, which are more in the region of the throat, right. So these notions of projecting feelings into the body map is relatively old. And it's just a biological adaptation that has led to the idea of chakras, which I think that chakras and visualizations of feelings projected into the body map. So it's ways in which your emotion is configured in a particular context, and a particular situation in your life. Being projected into a static model that you can learn to perceive and others and as you integrate all the features that you have available that oh, that person, or the entire context of the interaction, and then you visualize it and understand this is the state that this person is in. And you do the same thing with yourself. So you perceive your own feelings, by analyzing the things that your perceptual mind projects through your body map about the relationship that you currently have as an agent, environment. Does this

Unknown 1:33:39
make sense? It makes all the sense. It makes all the sense.

Unknown 1:33:44
It's very Merleau Ponty in from the Federal logical background, having the body as the logos and sense maker.

Joscha Bach 1:33:52
Yes, but I suspect that Merleau Ponty has confused a lot of people because the body itself is not important for this, the body is in some sense, the instrument that is inserted by your discovery of the relationship in which your to your environment, there is stuff that you can, that you sense that you can immediately control. These are your mental representations, right, because they are immediate, you can change your ideas about the thing right now. And then there are things that you can change your environment, and there are two steps removed and the thing that is in between the instrument of effecting these changes in the environment. Before they become perceptual again in the loop gets closed. These perceptions then turn into reflections which are again ideas, but this is the body the body is the missing link between your intentions and the changes in the environment. And so in this context, the body gets introduced. It's not quite the same thing as the body map. The body map is the thing that you can then infer to be associated with your body but the body map is a way to make sense of a certain modality of data. that is available to you as a human being, namely proprioception and the surface of your skin and so on. This data, fire and art are arranged in a particular vein, you can lump them together because of their statistical properties. And they all get routed to the same brain region based on these statistical properties. And this is your body map. And to have a body map, you don't need to have a body, right? Once the body map is trained on your brain, I can stimulate the body map and you feel feel feel a sensation as if it was in your body. And that also works if I sever your head at the spine and make it impossible for signals from your body to reach the brain. And conversely, if I suppress this connection and stimulate your body, or if I suppress the activity in the body map, and your brain does stimulate your body, you will not experience it, right. So the body map is necessary and sufficient for having the experience of your body. It's not your body itself. So your body isn't actually not involved at all. It's just a mental model that is being that is involved here, the mental model is necessary and sufficient for the experience. And of course, the existence of that body map serves a functional purpose for the type of organism that we are. But philosophically, that's not interesting. Because it would also work if it didn't serve that purpose. It just has to be arranged in this way. The purpose is only the reason that evolution has arranged it in such a way.

Unknown 1:36:30
What do you think about a synchronous, like, a causal parallelism, so it's called the C phenomena? And I think synchronicity, and I think Jung commented a lot after he had a dinner with Einstein, he went back home, and he thought about the synchronicity aspects. And Hans Berger, who is the creator of EEG machine, supposedly, he had this event of a synchronicity that actually led him to invent EEG, it historically been recording those letters between young and an Einstein that were exchanged, which explains this kind of lecture that he gave him this dinner table that he was having with him. And later on, he conceptualized based on this I Ching book, which is an esoteric book for the Chinese religion, the demonstration, yeah. And so they talk about this, how a&b being two independent localities, yet having the same event at the same time. And so I often wondered, like, how, how must one empirically look at synchronicity because it's highly cyclical. And again, it could just be disregarded completely. But it's still seems very interesting that two events, which are same, in essence, have two different localities are still happening at the same time, and whether how can someone somehow objectively navigate to understanding this, this kind of synchronous event,

Unknown 1:38:00
and it makes theological assumptions to Oh, yeah,

Unknown 1:38:03
true to true.

Joscha Bach 1:38:05
So I was looking at this same phenomenon when I was young. And I find this of course, very fascinating, because there's the potential to completely uproot the way in which we make sense of reality. So we should pay a lot of attention to whether it's true or not. And it struck me that almost everything that comes up in this space can be explained by either psychosis or telepathy or combination of both of them. And maybe we can also explain the remaining instances of telepathy with psychosis. Which means a way in which your brain models reality that is not indicative of the observations, but of glitches in artifacts in the way that your brain models reality in the resulting dream was formed. There is some indication that this might be true, because, for instance, synchronicity increases in people that are in a manic state. And this manic state can also for instance, be introduced by psychedelic drugs or amphetamines. And, as a result, people will experience more and more of the synchronicity. And when these people describe the synchronicity that they experience to a person that is in a sober state, the sober person will often find that the synchronicity is not that interesting that basically the way in which these phenomena are connected appears to be spurious and not very meaningful, that the events are not as meaningful as they appear to this particular person. And that the gravity that the person assigned to these objects and the resulting connection between them is a result of an overload of meaning that somehow a thing that is completely inconsequential, like say, a coin that you find on the floor, and that you will have dreamt before last week that this coin is actually meaningless, and that you might have dreamt about coins and that you'll find this coin is just right. And then coincidence. And maybe you didn't even dream about this coin, maybe this is just a deja vu kind of memory, where the memory is instantiated at a later point, and appears as a reconstruction in your own mind as a glitch, so to speak. And you can only know this if you have written down your dreams meticulously, an hour ago. And I found that a lot of people that have fabulous prophetic dreams. Notice the thing that as soon as the dreams are affecting an important thing and reality, like for instance, next week's lotteries, numbers, the Men in Black show up and prevent them from writing it down. So they will not have a recording of that rain for some reason. And right, that is very suspicious. It could be that the man or black exists, because if we're totally messed up this game reality in which we are if somebody is cheating, by knowing information that they know only from outside of the game and apparent reality. But it could also be This is bullshit, and is a form of psychosis a way in which your brain is making sense of reality. That is not true. But let's for a moment entertain the possibility that this is all true. What would this imply? It would imply that the standard model of physics is probably wrong. The standard model of physics, we know it's not complete. But it is able to predict reality at a very, very fine granularity to a very large number of decimal places. So basically, something would have to happen that is explaining violations of the conservation of energy that we haven't discovered yet. But if spirits exist and move things in the world, they must violate somehow, laws of conservation, which they which means you would, sooner or later notice this, because the numbers don't even out in the lab. If there are physical phenomena, it means that there is an entire branch of physics that hasn't been discovered yet. And this branch of physics would probably involve a secondary topology, a way in which we can construct a space that is orthogonal to the space around us. So the things that are adjacent to each other are adjacent with respect in our space to photonic interactions largely. So it's electromagnetic waves that we are perceiving when we see light. It's electromagnetism, that if you perceive and be touched solid objects, and we hear sounds, it's electro magnetic objects, the molecules of the air pushing at each other, or that produce these mechanical waves in the air. Everything that we that our senses give us access to is electromechanical in some sense, and even neutrinos, and so on act in this photonic space and can have interactions with the photonic space, and the weak force of the strong force only act at the

Joscha Bach 1:42:54
distances of the nucleus of an atom, which means that there might not even be in the three dimensional space, but might be in a different dimensionality, so to speak, so that we cannot really project them into the same three dimensional topology. And if telepathy is possible, if there's it might introduce a different kind of local space, that is not the same verb things are adjacent to each other in that space that are not adjacent in the photonic space, which means there is an entire set of interactions that we are somehow missing, or a way to interpret interactions that you're observing. You're not interpreting in the right way, the chances of that being true that no physicist has ever discovered this, and there is no experiment that we know of that is could not be violated by this AI system. But it's something that we cannot completely rule out right. The more we know about physics, the harder it is to change it because we know more and more of the known constraints. And so it's basically it's not harder because we are now indoctrinated just because the physicists and don't want to deviate from their doctrines. But it's because we know more and more about the constraints that all future models have to account for, if they want to make progress on the existing ones. And this is why most physicists would tend to dismiss the possibility of telepathy for instance, there are several ways of looking at telepathy there is a very straightforward and simple way that for instance, we can probably train ourselves with the nervous systems of others in such a way that we can basically create resonance effects that allow us to experience mental states together that you cannot experience individually. And it might also allow to in a nonverbal way to develop ideas together if you're really well synced, that can be interesting and settled. And that would allow to have communication between each other and exchange thoughts without speaking, but it would require something like a close entanglement, usually in the photonic space, which means we have to see each other maybe to each other, maybe if having seen attached each other for a long time, if you are able to send information to a person around the planet, immediately instantly into their minds, we cannot explain this was known physics. Right. So if this kind of telepathy was possible, it would require us to provide two parts of the world. One is the idea that our own mind is generated in our own brain. And the other one that that basically there is that physics is local with respect to light, or to electromagnetism. The nonlocality that we currently allow in physics does not allow the exchange of information because you cannot identify where the information comes from, in this non local fashion, if you cannot address it, if not, no observer of no system that is controlling anything that is performing any quantum function in the universe can know where the information comes from that drives it, it just noise, right, it is not going to be something that is going to drive the universe along, it would only work if there is some kind of regular structure that would allow you to identify the origin of that information. But if we had such a second set of a local universe that is just doesn't have the same kind of locality as this normal three dimensional universe that we are in, then how would you know what the boundary of your own brain is? If telepathy is possible? How would you know which of your thoughts are actually being computed in your own brain and are not just being driving your parts of your brain based on things that happen outside of it? Right, and if you will open up this possibility, maybe there is a level of your own cognition and perception that is entirely driven outside of brains, that is driven somewhere else in the universe, and you are just some kind of antenna for it. And we all are, and maybe there is some global brain, right? And then you go into the domain of Pan psychism. And it's not a pan psychism very necessarily, the mind is computed in apparent universe and therefore becomes from the opposite to the observer, inseparable to matter. But there is something like a pervasive mind that is emerging over all the organized matter, that is, that has controlled complexity, for some computation takes place to keep the universe in the shape in which it is. And we are, in some sense, a small part of that, and can maybe link up to it right. It's very tempting. It's also very romantic. I don't know if it's true.

Unknown 1:47:32
Yeah, no, I was, like, I keep wondering, oftentimes, when we talk about telepathy and synchronicity, it seems to me like most of the subjective accounts I read, some of them tend to be, you know, achieved in a sober states, but most of them are psychedelically, induced, telepathic kind of states. And, and they tend to describe it as if you're taking that to psychedelics, with a with a loved one with a friend, or even let's say a synchronous even happens when you meet another person who's within that same state of consciousness, but you will have never met them before, but you meet them only because, you know, this kind of psychical understanding, or this telepathic moment that this person and I person are sharing the same sort of heightened experience of consciousness or a reality, it seems to me that maybe, maybe if someone was to, you know, mix the chemistry of the brain in a certain pattern, that these are synchronous events, intelligent, telepathic moments would happen more, because it's essentially playing with the brain chemistry. And also, there's something about psychedelics which, of course, there's been a lot of research being done but still seems to do not just isn't explaining why these compounds tend to induce certain sort of psychical states, which are unexplainable, so telepathic or synchronicity often tends to happen. So I was wondering, do you think it's purely because of the chemical imbalance or, or even in a sober state, do you think there's some sort of a chemical or cyclical thing happening and bring that does sound it's not something that often happens, but only because of a cause, which is cyclical in nature that these events might occur. I think

Joscha Bach 1:49:21
that ethanol alcohol reduces resolution and the purpose of social ethanol consumption is to reduce the resolution of our participants until they have a lowest common denominator where they completely match. Right? So it's a good tool for having a sense of close connection with people that have subtle differences to you. And or at least, maybe not so subtle. If you take more alcohol, and there is psychedelics, it seems to be the opposite. That is it increases resolution and if you will, influence resolution and Namaste In learning system, you are bound to overfit. There is probably for the set of sensory data that you are looking at in any given domain and optimal resolution of the function that you use to describe it to make sense of the data. It's something that we noticed when we do statistics, right, you have a number of points, and you try to fit a curve to the point. Which complexity should this curve have? Should they try to reproduce all the vehicles that you see in the data? Or should they try to ever to deliberate over the data? And what is the resulting shape of the curve? Right, that has to do with the noise that is apparent in the data and in your sensory organs? So if you have enough time for evolving your cognitive domain, in your brain, so how many bits do you apply to model visual features, or social features, or cognitive features and so on, you should in some sense, allocate an optimal number of bits to this particular function that models this domain. So you're most likely to not overfit and not under fit. So you're not losing subtlety in describing the thing. But you're also not discovering subtlety where there is none. And the criterion of whether you discover subtlety that where there is none is how predictive Is it of the future. For instance, I read an article where somebody proudly reported that they discovered the exact function that describes the California Housing market. And it was an extremely elaborate function that had lots and lots of parameters in it, like growth of households grows of incomes, and so on. And it exactly could reproduce the past evolution of the market of the price curve of California and houses over decades. And as a computer scientist, I was looking at this and it was just laughing out loud, because he was overfitting this function had all these free parameters that enough of them, and the turtle them until the parameters gave a function that was fitting that thing and if you have enough free parameters, you can always get fit, right. But this thing is not going to be predictive. So it's likely that in the future, this thing is going to deviate. And so the way in which machine learning typically deals with this is that we take a part of the of this curve and check it out, use it as validation data. And then we make it blind, the learning algorithm blind to it. So we don't tell it this part. And we try to find a function that guesses the invisible part, and see how well it does this. And we do this for all the parts. So to extract all the information, we basically mask out every portion of this curve, for different instances of this learning thing, and be tried to find one learning one function that you can learn that works for all of them equally well, right, that predicts all the possible observations from all the other observations. And this is the best you can do under the circumstances unless you have some insight into first principles, and understand how this housing market actually functions by really going to the lowest level of the causal structure and understanding it which is not accessible, right? Because people buy houses and sell houses for so many different reasons that there is going to be practically for you a lot of noise, because you cannot write down this term by somebody died at this point and had to sell

Joscha Bach 1:53:24
the children had to sell their house very quickly, and so on, right, you cannot get all these things, right, you only get statistical average, right. So what's the psychedelic seem to be doing is that they increase the resolution dramatically. What people often describe is that they're able to stare at any object, whether it's outside in in the sensory domain, or whether it's in their memories or imagination, and they can discover an ending detail. And if you have this increased resolution, you're prone to overfitting, which means you construct objects that can explain the past better, but the future worse. And so when you look at the performance of people on psychedelics, they are able to explain the deepest problems of reality extremely well, physically in the state, they are not able to program a VCR or bite, they basically no longer able to interact with the environment very meaningfully, but they can explain everything and have a psychedelics users also tend not to be the most successful people at predicting the stock market and so on, they might have the ability to reach a certain insight when they're stuck. There have been some experiments where people think about the problem for a very long time. And then they were given in some controlled study a dose of psilocybin, and then they had this insight that connected everything and this insight was often a good one. So you're able to fill in the gaps, you're able to relax your priors, you're able to see things from a new perspective. But imagine you're now in a context where you wonder whether telepathy happened And you interpret everything that happened in this interaction. From the perspective, could this be the case, and you find lots and lots of details that you've put into your function that describes reality that is establishing this connection. But it doesn't mean that the objects that you use to describe reality now are actually cutting the world at the joints. There might be overfitting. Where this is the big thing for what would it look like if a human brain would overfit data in the same way as a machine learning system does probably put like a human brain on psychedelics.

Unknown 1:55:33
I'll say like, I often wonder, like when people say telepathy and synchronicity, people who do psychedelics often tend to explain that they traveled dimensions and they ascend to a different sort of higher dimensional consciousness. And they often explain it in terms of spiritual planes, or chakras, that they're ascending, essentially. And it seems to me like there's 1/7 plane esoteric model, which seems to say that the highest plane of consciousness is this cosmic plane, where everything is unified everything is absolute, time is infinite. And when I read extreme theories or theories of dimensions, which describe, like one to 10, dimensions, one to 11, or 26, Masonic dimension part of their theories, I often wonder whether, in a very weird way, if both these two different sciences are trying to understand the same thing, in the sense that what is this highest possible dimension that one can either read through physicality, or through pure mentality or pure psychical powers? It seems to me that it's possible with meditation and Intuit psychedelic so one could reach those cosmic, quote unquote, pains to through those states. But when we talk about more and more functional and empirical understanding of the universe, and whether what exactly your dimensions, I wonder, what is physics trying to do in that regard? Are they also trying to find this one point? Or is it just structuring out whether there could be more dimensions than one to 3d and then maybe more than five day, you know,

Joscha Bach 1:57:17
there's a potential bottleneck, everything that you know, you know, so your sensory entanglement is the universe, there is a set of nerves that gets stimulated, and they transmit electrical impulses into your brain. And your brain is constructing a function to predict the next set of impulses. And these impulses have no valence, they have no good or bad, they have no color, no sound, there are no people traveling to these impulses. But no idea is traveling. So these impulses, everything is must be constructed in your own brain. Right? There is no other way that then once you have that, then you will recognize this bottleneck. It's similar. When you look at the screen, then you look at the screen, there are no people jumping out of the screen, there are no colors in a sense, there's only bits and bits in three dimensions, which are happened to be these color dimensions, right and be mixed together by your brain into a function that makes sense of these objects at scale. But the fact that you interpret an arrangement of moving pixels on the screen as a person talking to you, so a video conference call is something that has entirely have to happen in your brain, right? It's it's not a feature of the screen, it's a statistical property of the pixels on the screen that they can be interpreted as a cohesive object in a three dimensional space that is being lit by a finite set of light sources and is an arrangement of cells that represents an organism, right? So you can project all this to make sense of that. It's the functional your brains contract thing. So we have these existence, this is not somehow a way to transcend this interface, there is no way to transcend the interface, you cannot get into the noumenon by any means. The noumenon is outside behind the screen, right? There is no way to get behind the screen ever. What you are exploring are different ways in which your brain makes sense of that. And normally planes are able to your contract experience. If the gain in the state, some kind of synesthesia, you are able to construct models of how your cognitive functions have different reality planes in the construction of your brain, so you get as good of a geometry is being constructed in your brain, maybe to some degree. And this is what I think these different. Let's refer it's different domain what your reaction is, by whatever test is currently think it's mostly the brain. It performs these operations. So it's, the introspection is not going to give you access to physics. It's going to give you access to your own cognitive architecture. you're muted.

Unknown 2:00:06
keep forgetting sorry. You know, it makes sense. Yeah. Because I often would, you know, think whether people keep talking about mostly within the esoteric communities that say, they often regard interdimensional travel and esoteric texts as as the T, true to the capital T truth. And sometimes when I try to introduce an integrated model, which tends to take lead to the esoteric in the physical physics and try to make sense with both of these two different subjects, they would often say that's a multidisciplinary approach, and it might have its own limitations. But sometimes I think maybe the best way to understand the universe is to take all the disciplines together, and somehow try to construct a way, a creative way that uses each and every theory, each and every subject to try to understand what is what is going on. Why are we here? Where are we going all that all the main five,

Joscha Bach 2:01:06
but there is a confusion that I think it's largely being introduced by religion. Religion is not a way to make sense of the world, it's a way to organize a society in pre enlightenment society, especially. And there is an important insight in there that is, most people are not very good at making sense of reality at scale and in detail. Right, it's, it's very hard. If you have an IQ of 100, you are technically not able to read a complicated manual or do your tax returns. And how can you make sense of reality, if you have just an average intellect doesn't mean that you are not able to be a capable member of society and have meaningful social relationships, you, you can be extremely capable, and so on. It's just in terms of sensemaking of first principles, you are going to be at a disadvantage. And the purpose of religion is to synchronize the behavior of large numbers of people post the normative, the moral behavior, and the practical behavior and their beliefs about how reality works. And in order to make that happen, religions decided to have multiple tiers of access to reality. One is an access that is basically King and level three, it works by projecting authority, and projecting opinions via authority. And people are supposed to assimilate these opinions, because the authorities know more than you do. And the authorities are clearly indicated by putting them on top of some pulpit giving them a special dress, and special titles and certificates that make them recognizable as authorities and people will buy into the narratives of these qualities, even if they plead Verity. August they're being punished if they don't. And then there's some people criteria for Well, the story can be true. And it's obvious Spain, find out as to when you think about your own life, right, at some point would like a narrative that tell yourself about any Givens as truthful. And that is, if it's supported by the evidence, and you looked at all the alternatives and integrated them, right. So you can only have the space of possible theories that can all explain the observation that is the shape Swathi, and then some presents you with something that shape is to have a chance for evaluated in the right way. It's the inverse. And mythology can be useful tool to organize society, but it cannot be useful way to understand society, necessarily, if you build a society based on mythology, it also means it has to be hermetic. Because what happens if you have a competition between different interpretations of the mess, the whole purpose is gone, right? So you will have an ironical interpretation of the mythology that is being enforced. And you're not allowed to be rational in public. And you have to be smart enough to understand that if you're given a religious society for different occurred, you will not be allowed to be rational and public about any of the tenets of the mythology because otherwise you will be punished, because otherwise the purpose of the mythology is going to be defeated. And this hermetic society also necessarily means that there is going to be a domain in which adults are operating and they are completely rational. So they cannot be infected by the mythology. And every religious tradition is going to produce a deep mythology department, the mistakes, the mistakes are people that try to make the mythology compatible with rationality. So they don't give up on the mythology they try to keep the tenets of the mythology intact, but they try to make inferences of it. So as a result, they break their brains start levitating the star to be in a magical universe. And every couple 100 years the Inquisition will go through the caves of the mystics with a big flame thrower and clean and then not again, but there Right, it's it's a defect of the psychological operation make it behave and is that

Joscha Bach 2:05:18
you don't understand rationality anymore, and you start to think you understand it. But this is very dangerous. If the pope ever becomes the Catholic, they are in trouble.

Unknown 2:05:30
Yeah, so do you have any concluding remarks or any questions you wanted?

Unknown 2:05:34
First of all, that it was sort of unexpected and just such a massive pleasure to be able to have a conversation with you. It's, it's been amazing.

Joscha Bach 2:05:45
Likewise, I enjoyed this very much.

Unknown 2:05:48
I totally enjoy listening to your every time. That's why I tried to join as many clubhouse rooms as possible to get as much information in my head as possible. Thank you. Thank you so much for doing this. This has been an incredible honor for me and in terms of learning and getting this perfect empirical and functionalist approach, but also diving into the rhythms of the esoteric, perhaps one chord that I remember that I suppose you told me once was the domestic drowns in the same waters, the mystic swims in the same waters, the psychotic tranzon, which seems to be a good cartoon house, I think my heroine has that's a yes. That's a good conclude the podcast.

Joscha Bach 2:06:32
It's still a trance, right? By the way, please don't be present me as some kind of authority. I don't have any authority. I'm just the guy who tries to think about these things just the same way as you do. And everything I say, can be wrong and wrong a lot. I change my opinions a lot. And my perceived certainty, whereas non I might disregard alternatives. I do this all the time. And so this is all just a conversation that we're having, where we try to develop our ideas as thinking autonomous minds as well as we can.

Unknown 2:07:03
Yeah, that's beautiful. That's beautiful. We thank you so much. Thank you so much for coming. I can't I feel lighter right now very much.

Joscha Bach 2:07:15
Thank you again. Okay. See you again. Everybody.
