Unknown 0:05
All right, good morning, everybody. Especially remember Joshua is first of all, different have questions for it. And so in some sense, this is the multiverse or collide back with us. Second time, where the Wizard of consciousness as he has been called in the UK version of Psychology Today. Of course, the question is, what is the wisdom is own consciousness or the wisdom of someone else's consciousness, or the width of our understanding of consciousness, but we're gonna find out today,

Joscha Bach 0:43
read this article and find it out

Unknown 0:48
of consciousness. But today tell us really about his idea of how the architecture of monitoring of AI of, of artificial general intelligence, which is, which is one of the ambitions that Joshua has, what that architecture is all about, and how to explain mind brain behavior and consciousness. So dosha they get away.

Joscha Bach 1:17
problem in psychology, this, when you find too many theories, many for your elbows and you perform an experiment, you're very likely to overfit. Right. And this might be one of the reasons that psychology then decided to become a positive, the science became a theoretic and no longer has overarching theories. So that now we have this big disconnect between therapeutic psychology and experimental psychology, where the therapist has to have theories as many free variables and how the mind works. And experimental psychology is not delivering any tickets, there is no theory they're thinking is of divert in psychology. And that was one of the reasons why AI is if it started, and later on computer scientists started, because it made a complication of models, we have an additional constraint, beyond performing experiments, the thing needs to be actually working. So if we are able to reproduce a certain set of phenomena, we know that we have found the function is able to produce that set of phenomena, which means a model of that thing, which means eventually is done part of the theory, and can explain how the mind works. And for me, when I got into AI, one of the biggest question was, how is it possible that the system can think and not just thing, but how is it possible that it feels? What does it mean for a system to have an emotion at all? And so that leads to the question, what is emotional terror in nature? What is the experience? And what is the relationship between that what is experienced and the experience itself? Imagine you want to build a robot like data and Star Trek. And you want to give data, something like pain, so data can feel something? How do you do this, you could start out with giving data information. So data has insight and looks at assists. And this is information about the impact, it's accurate, and so on, but it's clearly not an emotion. So maybe you want to attach a valence to this. I've cut my head, this is very bad, it's going to cost $2,000. Okay. It's also not an emotion, right? There's something else going on that which you need to do to turn this into an emotion. And I think what has happened is global state change and configuration change in data, data, it's going to change in many damage. For instance, data is going to have a change in arousal, it's going to go way up in resolution level, which is going to go way down, it's not going to look at many details in its environment anymore, is broadcast, this thing is going to become the center of his universe. And this is also something that leads to reinterpretation of the things around him. So for instance, the knife that was on the table and was what wasn't implemented for cutting cake now suddenly becomes a weapon. And it's dangerous. And he tries to get away from that state, which modulates in his negative enforcement signals and so on. Pain tells you do less of what you're currently doing, right? So data changes into another agent. And this change that data goes through this is this configuration changes greatly from state to state. This is what we mean by these configuration changes, typically emotions, we would always be in the same state, it's almost always modulation, you probably wouldn't call it an emotion, right? So it's about dynamic changes in a system that conflict figure its condition and as a result, configure its relationship to the environment unto itself. So it's not a parameter inside of the system, but it's apparently a modulating the system on the global level. So good to talk about which architecture we need to give it emotions and whatever components we need for this, how we model emotion and my own architecture, talk about motions in general in AI models, and how we could use this to start modeling personality. So the basic perspective observer is that the mind is best understood as a kind of a machine and a machine is a computational system. And computation simply means that you can describe the system as being in a certain state space, and you have a transition function that tells you how to get from state to state deterministically, or probabilistically. And universal computer application is the set of all those computable functions that take control of computable functions. And given enough resources, it's totally fascinating concept. Because it contains itself, the set of computer functions very easy to make universal controller.

Joscha Bach 5:58
So you're probably in this class of universal computers puts Bisleri amount of resources. But the interesting thing is that you can also run particular kinds of programs, it's very tricky to building a new burst of computer, it's very difficult to turn it into a mind, because the mind seems to be in the class of systems that can make models of a very wide range of environments, possibly all the possible environments over which a computational system can make models when given the natural resources. And our access to the universe is given by the central differences that interact with the world, what you get, is not matter or energy or color, or sound, but you get this information. And the meaning of information is its relation to change and other information. intelligence is the ability to make thoughts. And the purpose of all this modeling is usually a regulation to maximize rewards for the system. And this is very emotional motivation coming. For a long time, I was mainly focusing on handcrafted architectures, the classical cognitive architectures, came up with a lot of boxes and arrows and tried to explain the whole thing interacts. And there's such a different perspective there, you think about the mind not being constructed like clockwork, because there's not that much information in the genome that can define a very intricate locker. That is our brain eventually. But it's probably more constructed like a cappuccino, which means you take a number of relatively generic ingredients and mix them in the right order in the right regions. And then let the whole thing calculate until it forms the structure that you want. So basically, we have a much simpler generator function with the lower complexity that eventually gives rise to all the architecture with all its effects. And so to think about the general principles that you would need, the second mind could be that what you need is general because the contract oximeter plus a suitable reward system, whether it be words kick in in the right order, perform all the necessary complexity indexing. So if you think about attention based learning as a paradigm for setting up our mind, then differences in innate capacity of different minds are probably best understood as differences in innate attention. To maple, Grove, and winter and a few others have a very radical perspective. So they speak about very simple, very few principles that would be sufficient to generate the mind. And when you look at something like us, you see, that's probably somewhere in the middle. So some hybrid perceptual, which means yes, they have a point of canceling after the male brain thinks it's mostly generated according to simple general principles. But there's also enormous amount of bias and free binary, the whole thing to make it converge in a reasonable amount of time in your childhood, and lead to very similar results of convergence across many different individuals. So evolution has biased the Genesis and generation of this particular kind of system. If you think about cognition, you can roughly structure it in the form of layer reactively. Deliberative layer when you make plans and consider things into reflective layer, where we optimize the whole system, the system by looking at what was done, but you shouldn't be doing instead, you can also look at columns of cognition like a perceptual column process and column and action column. And if you do this, you get some something that grid right if you overlay both of them, which means differently to assumption you have reflexes and reflexive action, you have deliberative perception, planning and reasoning and deliberative actions, reflexive presumption, meter management, and the management of our actions. This is, this idea has been generated by Aaron Sloman, who came up with the following architecture that he suggests would be a good perspective on other main verticals this podcast condition affects H of F How ignition effect works in humans. So you have a bunch of reactive processes, that variable attention to the drug that decides that when something goes into the deliberative domain becomes available to your attention. And then you have meta management on top of this. And then you have your perception and action columns, which Emily can say are stored interact with each other, and a data log to memory, the activation of motives, a set of alarms that can interrupt the whole thing to make it possible, they will get shocked or a tiger cams will interrupt whatever you're doing.

Joscha Bach 10:31
And you have a model of yourself, personal self model, and so on in this architecture. And for me, the testing strategies, think about these things. But then I realize that these columns are actually not nicely separated. But every perception usually involves actions because you might need to move your head or change your position in space. And every action tends to involve perception, because you need to reorient yourself and collect data from the environment to make these things happen. And stuff in between actually, a lot of perceptions and actions that take place are mental representations. So in a way, the whole architecture is a lot more mixed up in itself. And if you want to split this up into different areas, you'll find that there probably something like 50 different areas of the cognitive domain that might roughly coincide with the brain areas that you find it and your cortex. So if we want to understand how this works, we need to look at all testicle architecture is not that isolated components, you need to find universal representations that are able to express a complete model of the environment. And to reason about it, you have to have something that can see my universal problem solving set of mechanisms that allow you to learn to plan things and to form analogies to control your actions to reflect on them and so on. And you want to have a universal motivation system that can give rise to arbitrary goals. And maybe you want to have emotional effects in the system. So what does it mean to have universal representations for promoting something like spreading an activation thing that allows you to build a reticle in distributed representations that in extreme case can be local. So we can come sufficient, discreet and low dimensional, that you can apply electrical operators on them, you can perform symbolic reasoning, you need to be able to have pointers on this so you can organize them into plants and change these plants into other order in your own language on

Unknown 12:33
my remote control

Joscha Bach 12:37
Why didn't you give this to me last time because later on?

Unknown 12:41
Okay, well, I think you need to exercise you know, yeah, so that's the dongle, you have to stick it to your computer. No, inside the bottom of it. Okay. Now on the side, there's a slight switch to turn it off something something? Yeah. Okay. And the green button in the middle is your pointer.

Joscha Bach 13:15
Okay, what it don't like is that is there's a better way. So

Unknown 13:18
let's see if we have more batteries, okay.

Joscha Bach 13:23
Okay. So, you have a bunch of operations that attributes representations that allow you to implement learning and categorization, planning, reflection and so on. And then you want to get perceptual data from an environment, you want to also be able to perform actions, and you wanted a feedback loop between action perception in this feedback loop, we typically call the environment right. And then the strategy staff from which we act and urge to perceive it to a model of the current situation. And the translate the situation model into past equations, some kind of protocol memory that we can use later on to learn from that past generalize, to frame the situations and correct them think so itself model. So this F model is the stuff that we always carry with us. And that is instrumental in producing our actions and perceptions. And I think that we have painted in this thing is the declarative memory, which basically object abstractions from the deep game are observing the world, and procedural memory that tells you how to do things, and how things pan out in the world. And the frame allows you to interpret the current situation as a particular kind of context. If you're in fact, right now, I'm in this kind of tutorial situation where a bunch of people is listening to me, I'm expected to deliver a lecture that people pretend to follow. So this is a frame allows me to predict the future and make sense of it of the present. And I have an expectation arising that tells me how the next one hour or so is going to pan out. You have plans that take place with this expectation, Verizon and If you generalize this, you basically have the word model locked to a memory or demanded stage on which you can execute possible goals. And then you need some action selection that allows us for these representations and our environment. And production needs to be informed by a motivational system which selects motives and makes decisions. And the motivation system itself is directed by a number of urges, which in turn correspond to drives. And based on the strength of these urges and drives in the situation of the environment that you measure the bunch of modulators like arousal, which tells you how excellent or how much extra readiness you should have, versus competent contemplation. But the process, I want to turn down your resolution, so you are faster and your cognition, if you want to do complicated planning actions, you want to turn out the resolution. This parameter tells you how much cognition you should spend on your updating on the environment versus on internal things, if you have an environment, that is changing dramatically, and these changes might potentially have a big impact on you, you want to spend more of your resources on updating the environment. And if you are setting up a startup company and your programmers are meant to spend most of their cognition internally, don't put that x to the doors and to make sure that nobody wants to go right. So they don't need to update the environment very much don't feel threatened by it.

Unknown 16:21
Are you claiming that these are components do you have to explicitly represent some of these?

Joscha Bach 16:27
I think it makes sense to, to represent them somehow. And usually the best way of doing this, it will be through this explicitly in our architecture, as we see, there are RegTech physically represented, which means that different signal types different neurotransmitters, which correspond to any of these parameters. We also have a selection threshold, which basically tells you how much your model should be stable and given moment. And you have a bunch of payments go into architecture, XOR and garbage capacitor companies, architectures that tend to focus on cognition as something that can isolate a problem solving capacity. And they don't look at this modulation or they don't look at the connection between agent environment very much. And so if we want to explore these things, we need to build an architecture that allows this. And I've built such an architecture, which is based on site here we see originally by Dietrich donor German psychologist who tried to come up with a cybernetic reinterpretation of psychology. And unfortunately, most of his work, he never bothered to publish this AI and also didn't do it in English. And I found that especially the theories on emotion and motivation are super useful for AI. So I took it on me to translate that into our context. So basically, we bought architecture, it was a project which took place over many years, and several dozen people evolve over the years. And we implemented agents in which to episodic learning and goal directed behavior, emotional modulation, and top down bottom up perception, simple planning and execution of hierarchical plans. There was a toolkit that people could use originally started in 2003. So because of Java and XML, and plug ins to the Eclipse IDE, and we did know that a perception designed to connect this to cameras, and you did control and simulation experiments and see how the emotional changes and so on happen all the time that poking electrodes and spreading activation networks, and then the different kinds of simulations, for instance, genetic simulations, where we would wait the agents for having suitable parameters for a given environment, or where the agents learned to go to make sense of their environment and communicate each other about strategies and how to survive share human experiments, this expression that emotional states in computer animations, and you also use this to control simple robots. And came up with a number of simulation environments in which these agents lifted, then, at some point, we decided, okay, let's do this again. But then, so we got this because we did this in 2012. Everything was done in browser interfaces and view for the architecture and Python. And now we have a company in Berlin, which is called MicroSTAR industries, which is run by a number of students that were involved in the original effort and written new tools to work with this, they can work with very large representations. And we use this now to control industrial robots. Yeah, so most of our code is still open source that you can download if you look at microsite industries. So let's go to motivation. If you want to motivate the nation, we can think about how the two goals come from human beings there must be a general mechanism that gives rise to all the possible goals that human beings can If, and obviously we have large multitude of goals, so you cannot enumerate all the possible goals and when you're born into this world usually don't know which ports are attainable and available, right? So when I was born to this world, I didn't know that computers would be available at some point, if the goal of learning Python or basic or something like this was not present in my brain. And in order to get interested in such things that need to be much more fundamental things that give rise to such highly concrete and specific goals, right. So what is the general system that can give rise to all these interests

Joscha Bach 20:38
that's the difference between motivation and emotion. Motivation is what reflects our needs, and gives rise to goals or directly believer, and it does not have to be associated with emotions, right, you can have a motive, this hour being emotional about it, you can say, I'm hungry, and I want to eat something. But I don't have an emotional detachment. That's right. And emotion is something else. It's a manipulation of perception, cognition and action, and it receives its valence whether something is good or bad, or what it feels like to you from the motivational state. And it receives the objects of the emotion from your cognitive system. So when you're jealous, it's a negative effect that is directed on a particular kind of mental representation, namely, that you may or may not have a partner that may or may not be going astray with somebody else, and so on. Right, so it's a very particular kind of representation that you need to construct in your mind, in order we have this very particular kind of negative emotion, often also leads to effective expression. So it's something that can be recognized from the equivalent of the Nordic states of the body by other agents and vice versa. So if you look at the motivational system, for our votes are offered one frustration of one of our needs, which are demands of the system that you're in. And these needs manifest its urges. And then to the selection and a one of these modules that is associated with satisfying avoid the frustration of me. And once we have selected one of these modules, it becomes an intention, right. And the intention is a motive that we have raised to something that we want to be committed to satisfy. And our drives are represented physiological, social, and cognitive, and physiological drives as things like hunger and thirst and pain avoidance addressed and call them worms and so on, hundreds of them. Even things like hunger answers can be decomposed into hunger for salty things, and sweet things, and so on. And they are active to different amounts at different times. And they give rise to basically purchase to make certain things environment will be similar to the lack of social structures, which structure our interaction as others and be a cognitive purchase. The physiological drags kick in and after the autonomous degradation of your body fat. So for instance, when it gets very hot, just start to sweat and maybe done right, maybe you get cooled enough again. And if that is not sufficient, you might get an urge to move into the shade. And the physiological drives to better fit into your physical survival, survival itself. It's way too complicated, but it's right. It's the emergent result of all these basic drives. So if you manage to eat to avoid pain and injury, and get enough rest, and so on, you do tend to survive. If you look at the social drags, one of the most important ones most people seem to be ideation. affiliation is the need basically to belong to get okay men signals from the book to tell you, you're one of us, you're part of this thing. This thing is increased affiliation earning sense title, agency signals, basically, that people tell you that you're part of the group or give you signals like smiles or cuddles and so on. And it's decreased by the opposite by anti legitimacy signals. And this allows us in the group for non material reward and punishment, you don't have to give this individual extra resources to be rewarded for cooperation, you can use virtual currency like smiles in France, right? So without diminishing the thickness of the book, you can reward or punish people, depending on the degree of cooperation. And there isn't external legitimacy, which is the acceptance by the group. There's also an internal legitimacy which kicks in and nobody is looking. And people call this for instance, honor, so you have an internalized sense of what you should be doing in order to be normatively acceptable. And the conformance to these internalized norms is what we call internal legitimacy or honor. And there are other drives, for instance, dominance, the desire to get to a higher status and nurturing the desire to reduce the suffering of others, and romantic effect becomes a threat competence, uncertainty reduction and aesthetics and our model competence is the desire to become more powerful to become better at satisfying your needs. And things like learning how to play an instrument is largely driven by competence, right? It feels good. If you become better at something, if you become more powerful, and competence can be an understanding. So it's related to a particular task or problem, there is the general competence, which is how good you are, in general to solve your problems, how

Joscha Bach 25:27
many others you can take in a given environment, because you're able to cope with it in general. So this is your unspecified coping potential. And that's something that can affect oriented competence. You see this in small children, that matrixstore down to them delight in the fact that they've been able to create such an amazing effect, large scale effect on the environment. And it's probably the same thing that makes grown up babies delighted in Fireworks, ninjak NASCAR races and explosions. But it's just the ability to perform a huge change on the environment gives you a sense of competence, and it's intrinsically rewarding. And there is uncertainty reduction, which is a need for exploration. It's not exactly the same thing as novelty seeking. Because if people were intrinsically novelty seeking, everybody would be doing mathematics like crazy, because mathematics, unending source of novelty, the reason why most people don't do this is because they don't anticipate to be able to reduce uncertainty when they do it. Right. Most people have learned demanded mathematics, uncertainty will increase. And there's a frustration of the need. And the mathematicians are exactly that subset of the population, which have learned that when they go to mathematics, there will first be a new source of uncertainty, which they will then reduce. And then if a new attempt, which again, they can reduce, so it's an unending source of pleasure, right. Also, aesthetics plays into this other types of attendees, basically, what is stimulus oriented, there are certain stimuli that certain bodies, schemata, and so on, and certain harmonics that we find intrinsically pleasant, because we are by up to, and then there is something like absolute aesthetics, which is about finding better representations. So whenever we discover a better representation of something, eventually, but most of the music is about so when you listen to the late Beethoven string quartets, and so on, the aesthetic that you get to see there is very significant effects, aesthetics and mathematics, its structure discovery, you listen to this music, and you suddenly see the structure and use the music plays out, you see, oh, my god, it's so high stakes. Is he going to? Is he going to make the right decision? Is he going? Yes, yes. This is how it works. But in order to get the you need to build all the structure, and it's very similar to mathematics. In mathematics, it's completely discovered music, you have more degrees of freedom. So you construct more possibilities, but eventually, both are about fractals. Okay, so all our personal goals correspond to at least one demand. And from our needs, we get hurt signals, which kick in as soon as the good gets strong enough, and they need to pregnant. So for instance, when you're hungry, suddenly things that are edible, apart from the environment, from our application, have many vivid memories of edible things, and so on and try to locate them in the environment and construct plans. It does help for learning. So this is useful for directing your attention on certain things, and then performing attention learning on them. And of course, the price our decision making. So there's strong directions, and every perception and action for all of these important things here is pleasure. And this is a change in one of your demands is reflected in the platform, this festival, and the strength of that signal is proportionate to the amount of change per unit of time. So for instance, when you are not thirsty, and you drink a little bit of water, you're not going to derive the plant amount of labor from this. But if you plant a whole mountain, and you're very sweaty and very, very thirsty, and you get something to drink on top of this mountain, and you have a huge data in the satisfaction of that particularly, it's feels extremely pleasurable, right. So, the strength of this data signal is proportional to how much distance you cover that feed between target and current value in a certain period of time. And the purpose of pleasure and distress signals is that they give reinforcement values for your behavior procedures, and episodic sequences. And so you can learn from them and define goals, which are repetitively goals that you want to obtain or diversity of concentration that you want to avoid. So you have for instance, if you take this first example, you have something like a tank, this tank has a cabinet when it's cheap and this thing's full, and you have current level. And this distance here is basically the urge indicator. The larger this distance is, the bigger your urge to drink becomes. And this allows you to learn to create Association as a goal, your beverage of choice for events situation. And you also create negative associations with situation that you should be avoiding when you're thirsty, like going out to the desert.

Joscha Bach 30:09
So the goal, the situation or inaction that affords to satisfy any universal goal is one that was frustrating. And all behavior is directed on satisfying an ethical code, or the universal and needs a predefined with the goal to learn to depend on your particular environment. So physiological needs, if we talk about them already, their survival is an emergent property, social needs. And obviously, it needs. And for each of those we have decided on current value will describe strength and change and unique gives you a pleasant signal or this type of signal depending on which direction this change happens in. And there's ultimately this specific health alarm you have until you're dead, or Henschel individual for satisfaction closes. And this is your urgency, right. So it's difference between the Earth spins into deviation between the time value of time and between the current value within the tank being completely empty, which tells you how urgent is it that you satisfy that need. So definitely not construct a simple learning systems integration give you an hour demand indicator, which is given by the search. And then they've changed indicator which tells you how much this changes over time. And when the change happens in terms of what direction you get this positive variance indicator, which is a potential signal, or here you have a displeasure signal. And then create an association that for the positive valence indicator creates associations to both situations. And here for the negative signal, you create an association to the aversive situation right to those situations you want to avoid. And you don't only learn the association directly to the situation that's currently in Europe model. But you can also create strengthen the connection of that same previous states in your mind. So basically, you learn the chain of sequence and sequence of events that tend to lead to the goal situations. And this gives you a nice automatic scripts, especially if you overlay this over many, many situations start to generalize over these scripts. And this allows you to construct simple plans. And you have many of these automatisms. And they don't even need conscious intervention. So sometimes you might write a paper or listen to music about everyone, suddenly you find yourself in the kitchen in front of the fridge USSF. How did I get here, you just followed an automatism because you became hungry. And even though there was some more people, Oh, your attentional threshold to trigger the sequence of actions that you were not properly about. So they never need to have an urge. There's an autonomous regulation and this one doesn't kick in. For doesn't work, you need to have a deliberative mechanism that chooses the goal of the goals that you have. And then it follows through on that. So first, basically, you need to come second, if you're an autonomous regulation is possible to trigger this urge signal. And then you try to satisfy this urge opportunistically at first, for instance, I might be working on something and my wife, sneakily puts a sandwich next to me while I sit on my table. And at some point, I look up and the sandwich is gone, because I got hungry in between an unsatisfied urge, optimistic he was out disrupting what I was doing. And if that sandwich wouldn't have been here, probably some mechanism would have come in, which would have disrupted my work and made me go to the kitchen and make myself a sandwich, right. So if no opportunistic self deception is possible, then we need to make a decision, right, we make this decision by looking at how strong is the urge, and we subtract the current suppression, which basically follows that the currently active purchase because it has some significance by itself, we check if this is larger than the strength of the currently leading motive within that company to unlock like writing a paper. And the strengths is nice, the suppression becomes stronger than the strength of the leading mode. And then when we call a strategy to satisfy the switch, and offense, actual strategy, mode strengths, as the expected report from this action mark like is the urgency multiplied with the competence and divided by the cause of the strategy. So the more costly it is to do this thing, the less effective reward I will get for this and this, weaken the strength of the model. If I don't find a strategy, then I will try to construct a plan that takes more deliberation. And if no plan is stopped at all, increase the need for exploration and make it an environment so I can find such plans in literature. And what I've done is this I turn the strongest motive into my leading motive, which is my current intention for getting attention that covers the majority of maybe yours. So why do I need to pick one it's because I have only one body and most of the action for the performance environment goes to this bottleneck that only it will be able To perform one action at a time, which means I have to commit to one leading strategy, even though I have many others in the background, this simple algorithm that can directly implemented my competent architecture and cure this case,

Joscha Bach 35:12
the needs are characterized by a bunch of parameters. Thus, the strengths of the mean, which is the relative importance compared to others. There's the decay, which tells you how often you need to replenish this need, then in the absence of things happen. So for instance, from time to time, you need to sleep again, or a lot of people need a lot of affiliation. And so if you're an extrovert, and you have a stronger need, for affiliation, that you need to replenish this more often than when you are an introvert. So you seek out social stimulation more often than you have to gain which is the effect of satisfaction, how and how much do we get out of satisfying this particular need. And the last, how much do we do spend this needs gets frustrated. And you all know people that have differences in this principle, perspective, affiliation, some people in a very strong pain signal, and they failed on social interactions, or those get relatively deep pain signal and then fail in social interaction, some people get a lot of satisfaction and then succeed in a social interaction, this don't feel much difference in this. And this basically leads to people that are more or less abrasive, and then social interaction, more or less introvert. So the different configuration of the need parameters leads to different personality traits. We don't act on the needs themselves, but we act on is the anticipated needs. Because when you get the pleasure of pentacle, the action is already done, right. And you feel very satisfied after having eaten a sandwich, the sandwich is gone. When you have an orgasm, all the necessary actions have taken place in the past. So the thing that motivates you is not the reward signal itself, but the anticipated reward, we act on models of all rewards, right. And these multiple rewards, we could call them purposes. So our purpose is in order to make them accountable to each other need to form a hierarchy. Because otherwise, we're not going to reach our goals and satisfy our needs. It's important thing you might have points to say, become sliver for the summers. And you're not that affected it. And you also want to eat chocolate. And these are two different behavior clusters that are somewhere in conflict. And you need to make them accountable to each other in a certain way, which means you need to organize them into hierarchy. And the degree to which was successful in organizing units into a hierarchy is much you could call internal integrity, right. And this hierarchy of purposes doesn't have a single solution. I remember when I read muscle in my younger days, I was very unsatisfied because we knew because this famous hierarchy of needs that he comes up with this pyramid of needs, didn't convince me first of all, our needs are clearly not in a hierarchy. They are all on the same level, even though they have different strengths. It's not true that you will first of all eat before you do a revolution. Sometimes you do just the other way around. So sometimes you do self actualization before you do a while base thing, or the other way around. It depends on the current strengths and opportunity, right? It's not that there's a strict hierarchy that allows you to work on one level, then go to the next level. This is not how it works. And the other thing is, the things that you put into this pyramid are actually not needs. So self actualization or survival are too complicated to be defined as needs, the basic needs are much more simple. And our realized Maslow's pyramid on hierarchy of purposes of needs is actually a hierarchy of purposes. And you need to construct a hierarchy of purposes in your cortex as a model of your needs, right? Survival is a purpose. Happy your children is a purpose. Having your society is a purpose and you make them accountable to each other, and you form a certain structure. And this structure doesn't have a single valid solution. There are many possible solutions. Some people do art to eat, and some people eat to do art, they might end up doing the same things, the same proportions, but for different reasons. And this hierarchy of purposes, controls the way we interact with each other much more than our personalities, because they interact with each other. We do this based on shared purposes, not on shared needs. Okay, so this anticipated report is what determines our actions, that's probably implemented via the prefrontal dopamine system and the actual rewards determines the reinforcement. So this determines future anticipated reports. So, this is the learning signal and this is the actions

Joscha Bach 39:36
and the minutes reactions are not only caused by the present reports, right, but by these anticipation, imagining reports, if you expect something to happen, this also can give you pleasure and pain in direct your cognition and action. So when you want to implement this basically, is something like that. So it's, it's a particular type of things because logical social, cognitive, it has value at a given time. endpoint, it has an initial value architecture, then hits the strengths of the corresponding verge urgency, which is how much time you have left to satisfy the pleasure signal that is associated with this particular pain signal associated with this particular point in time. Here, you have to wait which tells you how strong it is relative to the other needs, then the decay time or retention this thing that you gain and loss, how strong you to react to satisfaction frustration, strong do you react to imaginary satisfaction and frustration. So, when you imagine this is an anticipated thing. And then, for instance, for social urges, when the Imagine give an amazing presentation, and everybody will love us, this might give us more pleasure than they imagined that we will have a good meal later on. And this will make us less hungry, right. So, you will not satisfy a need for hunger very much like playing games in your mind. But maybe you can satisfy your social needs by playing games in your mind to some degree, then you have the sensitivity to the to the pleasure and the sensitivity to the pain and the time for whatever it takes to decay, because the different types of things and standards that we get are implemented different ways. Because ultimately, and we have the sensitivity to the pleasure and pain for major satisfaction. We get the urge as a function of the weight and the change in value at a given time point. And you get the urgency as the baked into the remaining time. The value is depends on what this thing was before then how much the standard decays over time automatically. And how much gain you have from a given moment and how much loss we have in a given moment based on our interactions with the environment. And same thing for imagined gain and loss. The pleasure is a function of the change in a given amount of time a given moment. And likewise, the pain and then the pain from depletion, if your need is almost depleted, you tend to get into increasing pains and also when you get very hungry, this creates a particular kind of pain by itself. But then, we want to implement this in an AI agent, we also need to define an event with event this perspective, motivation is related to a consumption, consumption means that it needs satisfied or frustrated. And this gives you a particular reward. And it happens with a particular kind of certainty. And then your particular skills to deal with this event to achieve the consumption. And there is something that the remaining time or it could be also distribution, which tells you when you expect this many event to manifest in the consumption itself is related to a need gives you a particular reward per unit of time gives you a total reward that summed up. So when you eat, you have a certain amount of pleasure that you continuously have at every moment, or discrete events whenever you swallow, and you have a total amount of pleasure that the meal is going to give you and you have the duration over which the mu takes place, you have a maximum reward that you can listen to as probably cap will place and then you can be. And then there is a discount that you put in depending on how far this in this in the future, and how much this decreases your expectation of this being an thing that manifests in your life. Okay, let's not go into all these details. There, I can want to send you a publication where we document all the things. So this tells you how to generate this report signal. The word signal is typically something that plays out as some curve that reaches valuations. There's some s curve going on typically, when report manifests, because initially, you have a lot of satisfaction and then the satisfaction flattens out when you're satisfied. And you need to calculate when you consume something, how much of that you consume in every time point what the delta is for that

Joscha Bach 44:17
then you will deal with anticipated needs you need to project them into the future you So you did the discounting function based on your certainty the distribution of the expectations of the things in your future and how much less interested you are and things and they are further in the future because they are less likely to manifest due to possible branching expectation in your environment. Right. And you have an expectation that you will eat in 1010 years from now. Yes, yes, that expectation, but there are so many things that can happen in the next 10 years. That should probably discount that near 40 So this is roughly what you need to implement motivation and cognitive architecture. Let's go to emotion. For me, most of the interesting side is of emotion strikers. have a full background, Ekman had discovered that there are some people that are super good at detecting lies, like, pretty supernatural lie detectors. Many of these people are detectives, policemen, judges, and so on. So people that are used to looking at faces a lot and correlating this with where these people aren't lying or telling the truth. And so he wanted to know, what is it that these people are doing that I'm not able to do. And he started filming interviews with high resolution cameras, and he was looking at the facial expressions of these people in a lot of detail. And he saw lots of lots of micro expressions, which are only there for a very small instant in time, and then go and buy into realize that people are have difficulty controlling their micro expressions. And there is the logic in which they do this. And he could reverse engineer this. And then he started studying the emotional expressions themselves. And he put electrical clumps in his face, to simulate all the facial muscles and took pictures of them and classified the facial muscles and Vandiver, which emotional states that would be excited and how not, and came up with a system called facial expressions based on the muscular innovations. And there's a very interesting thing that he discovered and this is you can decompose spaces into some basic components of the expression, and then you can add them on top of each other. And you find that you always get the valid facial expression, right facial expression is basically a sample of particular expression dimensions. So, you can, for instance, increase a pain variable and you can increase the neuronal variable, and there are certain correlates of this in your facial expression. And you will see that along these two dimensions, you always get a valid facial expression that people are able to enter. And this is basically cultural invariant, there is not that much fundamental difference between cultures, but there is difference in which emotions different countries seem to be appropriate to express and how useful it is to express certain emotions in a given culture. But the basic emotions can be recognized across culture. So people, they make very similar interpretations when they look at a particular visual question. And then also boards across species. So other primates have very similar emotional expressions to our own, and don't even need to have something like a biological agent, you can also recreate this this robot, or computer animations.

Joscha Bach 47:34
So how does this work internally, so a bunch of models that are called appraisal models, which have originally been developed in McDonald's and Richard Lazarus. And the idea is that emotion is a competent appraisal of your relationship to your environment, and your motivation and your permission, basically, have a mapping between certain states of your motivational system and your environment, and the relationship between yourself and the environment, and map this to internal states, which are these emotions. And plus Farah is trying to make this more systematic and came up with the stimulus, equalization checks. So you have several stages and these checks, you have an innate sensorimotor check, which is pre attentive and automatic, then you have something that is learned on top of this, and then you have a deliberate thing where you actually reasoned about the situation and adjust your emotional state, according to its take place. And then you go from the relevance of that thing to the implication of that thing? And how are you able to cope with the situation? And what's the normative significance of this, how it's going to play out for you in a social environment. And these things, evaluate one after the other, and the two different components and the emotional response, the thing that was missing from those Harrisburg is the nature of that internal thing. So basically, for this is a black box, which is the mapping from stimulator with us. So you have a certain number of criteria, like you learned that your grandmother has died to grandmother was important to you. This was a very sudden change, we're not aware of this, and so on, you will need to take care of your estate and all these things, you check them in the box in the questionnaire, and you have strengths of these stimuli from one to five. And then you have emotion that corresponds to this. But what happens when you don't have that emotion? What means you tick all these boxes and you feel oh, there's nothing? How would you represent this in this model? Right? There's, it's possible that something else entirely happens. And this cannot be represented because it does not represent this model, the functional implementation of the emotional state, right? And the actual architecture that's behind it, emotion is not just a mapping of environmental stimuli to a particular thing. And emotion is a process that takes place inside of you and that you classify as a region in the space of cognitive configurations, right. So if you look the conceptual analysis over Emotions are Tony Cohen, Collins has written a classical book about it. And they said that emotion is a valence reaction to the consequences of against the actions of agents or the aspects of objects. And you can classify our normal emotion terms. According to that, so, if you look at events reaction to the consequences of events you can pick wins in this case are displeased with the event. We focus on the consequences for others, it is desirable for others who are happy for them or resent that they get this. If these actions are undesirable for others, depending on whether you like the others you might be floating or you're picky. In when you focus on the consequences for yourself. The prospects are irrelevant or directed on the future, you have hope and fear that the prospects are irrelevant, you have joy and distress. And when your prospects like hope and fear are confirmed, you get to satisfaction or the confirmation of your fields respectively. If your prospect or disconfirm, you get ready for disappointment, right? Then you look at for the actions, humaneness reaction to the actions of agents, you can think of those actions or disapprove of them. When you focus on yourself you feel pride or shame when you are this agent when you focus on another agent, concrete admiration or reproach and then the combination of his adopting and attribution so we get to gratification and rewards of gratitude and anger. And then when you look at the valence reaction to the aspects of objects, you know, lacking of these objects, or disliking, and so you have love and hatred was obviously American, German stone that object if you don't love Coca Cola, because I think our language love means to experience a sense of shared purpose. And I don't have a sense of shared purpose with Coca Cola you might visit a particular drink, right? Now, I completely objectify the Coca Cola and it's a relationship fair that it's not a moral subject to me, right. So I get to this in a moment.

Joscha Bach 52:05
In Dempsey theory by different donor starts out, there's an affective space, which I think is much better to express what happens internally in each end, and it's affected space has dimension of Valence, which tells you the applicants or version of that particular state that you are currently experience, then you have the selection special, which tells you how dominant remote this whole Starborn attendance, you are on it, and then your arousal is up and they can live off your unspecific subtyping syndrome. And this is based on a theory Bible and point, it's very similar dimensions. One is one of the original psychologists before the reason kicked in. And he already did solid experiments. So it's not psychoanalysis stories, it's relatively solid stuff when you put people into a lab and levered them to detect emotions. And this theory now these dimensions that we came up with that being rediscovered by at least half a different cycle, or half a dozen different psychologists in the last century, independently of each other. So you have these pleasure, dispersion dimension, attention variation dimension, and it comes about so that one's work. And he's done on all the dimensions of CCLE. If he's six dimensions, you also have this resolution devil, which tells you how deep your focus is on things, but it's shallow, then you have narrow versus wide, and you have the securing rate, which tells you whether you check your environment or your internal commission more. And basically, these three are potential dimensions. And these are the valence and arousal and your affective state, the state in which you are in total emotional state basically, is the configuration of the system that the six dimensions. And so the moderators are also selection, special security, special resolution devil, they also do Agile, estimate of competence, uncertainty, which tells you how well you can cope with the environment, and how anxious you should be, and potentially distressing. The valence. And your affective state is an emergent property of these modulators. So you don't have to put in anything additionally, stressed emergent over these modulators, if you bought a cognitive system that is modulating the things that have also intellection specialists who have a solution that works and has competence and certainty needs and so on, you automatically get similar emotions as you would have in humans. And if we implement different modulators, you will still have something that an observer will interpret as emotional states, even though they're not completely human emotional states. And maybe you see this when we observe animals we see they do have emotional states, but they're not necessarily human emotional states were able to make that distinction, right. So the affective state is an emergent property of the modulation. And our higher level emotions are directly affects our affective states that in addition to this We have an object that is given as the content of our condition. And the purpose of the emotional modulation is that they control the lives and the depths and the biases of our operations. And they control how our mental representations are formed and selected in a given situation by shifting us in a particular direction parameters. And thereby they modify our memory, perception and memory, our recall, and our planning and action selection. And the purpose of the whole thing is to make us more efficient, right, that reduces the complexity of phones and processes. And it's just a question does AI interest you need to have emotion. And this depends on how much they reduce the complexity of the contract processes. If this is a linear reduction and complexity that you get, by applying these modulators, maybe you don't need it, because we can afford to buy a computer that is linearly better faster. But we cannot make a brain that is n times bigger than the brain that you're currently having. Right? It's also a trade off because of these emotional things. If you increase your arousal and reduce your rate of resolution level, that's an answer that you're going to miss, you get faster to these answers, but you're not going to get all of them. So you train, for instance, a firefighter to not be emotional in a when the fire breaks out, because you want this person to be in full, deliberative mode, instead of reacting based on impulses that are very short sighted, right. So in for the kind of environment that we are in, you typically want to avoid most of the extremes of emotional modulation. Because we're no longer living in an ancestral environment, the Tigers are coming all the time. So these modulates that we implemented site model. And you could play around with this. And it thinks that the macro side is these primary regulators have also been working called aggression, which tells you the fight or flight response how much you approach this thing in your environment, or retract from it. And then get the attention about the resolution that was depression, and secure and right.

Joscha Bach 57:10
These motivators interact with each other. So depending on the strength of all your needs, this influences their arousal, and the suppression and is leading on very strong increase in suppression. So if you have something like a very strong urge, like you're very hungry, you're unlikely to do something else before you have eaten, this avoids motor phosphorylation. And these strong get a motive also leads to a separate lowering of the securing rate. So when you're very hungry, you focus on getting the food instead of focusing on a lot of environmental condition, and you're trying to competence is very high. So you're generally good at satisfying the needs, your suppression gets increased, because you can't afford not to check your background very much. And your aggression gets increased, because basically, you can afford to assume that you will be fine and address the thing add ons, we're going to bike competence for the current task is high, then you also check you lower your security, right? You look at the urgency of all your needs together and increase their hustle, the urgency of the reading mode and increasing the suppression to focus on that thing exclusively to its duration, you decided to increase the security way to check out the environment war, and he will decrease the suppression because you don't know anything and you're doing the right thing. Then obstacle preventing distraction you might also increase aggression so we can get rid of that obstacle. And it will also itself excuse a resolution that will and decreases the suppression. So these are the dynamics two modulators it's basically a cybernetic system, where these parameters influence each other. Each modulator has parameters that are individually different. So they might have a baseline for instance, you might have a baseline for your valence, how much pressure Do you feel then you will be left alone and you have a range in which area does your valence fluctuate and the volatility what does it take to make you fluctuate a lot? And then the duration How long does it take to get back to baseline right and these parameters for your temperament. So for each of these modulators, you can in principle have these parameters or the equivalent can be implemented in various phases of the organism But practically, it's usually done this particularly with transmitters. And these modulator parameter configuration lead to different temperaments and people temperament is slightly different from personality. So let's look at the motion sets direct effect plus modulation. For example, fear, fear is characterized as taking a recipe the next week, this gives you a negative Dayton's plus arousal and anxiety is that is different from fear because anxiety is not the anticipation of the adverse events. It's an uncertainty about the future. return. And this gives you the data to parents plus a low competence, which means you're not sure that you will be able to deal with the uncertain events that are going to happen, right. So, anxiety feels slightly different from fear and is different implementation anxiety can turn into fear, as soon as you have get a concrete object, as soon as this uncertainty is reduced, and you will know that this bad thing is going to happen, anxiety is going to turn into fear. If you compare anger executors, Anger is an emotion that you have a perceived obstacle, usually an agent that prevents you from reaching your motivational relevant goal. And to kind of get to the school and more things gives you a name and convenience. And you have essentially be a verb. So you basically make sure that this agent has to do it again. And the relevance of this call is basically redirected into the sanctioning behavior. And you have high arousal at low resolution level, and high action readiness and the highest, the next threshold to become very stubborn. And you might be doing things because of these modulations that are against your own best interest, right, you're modulated into a particular thing, that you're more action ready, and more aggressive than you normally would be.

Unknown 1:01:13
Yeah, I mean, you are mapping folks like logical categories of emotion into systems to correct map, maybe it does a better mapping.

Joscha Bach 1:01:25
There is no correct emotion, the emotion itself is a perceptual style. So the emotion categories are formed in every culture. And by pointing at stuff, right, it's not that anger is a natural kind. It's not that you have a particular kind of anger module in your brain. When you say that somebody is angry, is the point at a region in their space of modulators and behaviors. And say, for instance, Tom put your tent in his paper on chain because he was so angry, or handed his paper in much earlier than everybody thought because he was so angry, right? So

Unknown 1:01:59
dimensional space.

Joscha Bach 1:02:00
What do we mean by this SV is a person that can higher arousal, and there was something in front of me reaching one of their important goals. And this gave them higher aggression that I normally would have, and so on. So in this sense, the these folk psychological concepts are what you're talking about. It's what we agree on. And we say anger, but the practical implementation can cover a very wide range of possible states.

Unknown 1:02:26
But so what you're describing is a high dimensional space. Yes. Where there might be some attractors.

Joscha Bach 1:02:33
Yes, basically, regions in that space, when people talk about emotion, it's a perceptual style, that they form over a region in that modular space. At the emotion words that different countries have are different. So there's this famous thing that German September champion, Florida, and which is a particular kind of emotion about the misfortune of others. But when Americans disgust of a child in Florida, they usually don't say, Oh, my God, these evil Germans, directions more like, oh, there's a word for it. And,

Unknown 1:03:04
I mean, the evil Germans invented it.

Joscha Bach 1:03:07
Yeah, but the Americans have gloating, for instance, right. But for instance, Jewish has a version prior to achievement of your offspring. There's a particular word for that. And it's a category that basically every other culture is knowing to, but they don't might not have a particular word for it, right? So basically, can take this area in your motivational and emotional space, you modulator space, and say, Okay, let's find a name for this particular category and cluster it. So these emotional terms like anger is a it's a clustering that

Unknown 1:03:39
takes place What about, like arousal?

Joscha Bach 1:03:44
I don't think that also is an emotion, at least in none of the clitoris, I know, it could be used as an emotion. So when I mentioned Scipio, it's one of the dimensions. So what you could say is, if you if you want to liken it to particle physics, that is stuff that is compound, it's made from simpler things. So there are emotions, which are the combination of several more basic emotions that are put together. And then there are emotions that are these basic emotions, you can take them apart into things like arousal and valence, and arousal data themselves are not emotions yet, right? They are below this. So they are their quirks. They don't occur independently as emotions.

Unknown 1:04:25
But arousal is probably an emergent property.

Joscha Bach 1:04:29
But it's a relatively simple intellectual property. It's not an emotional impact of also is at least three different things. If you look at it, it's more detail because we have adrenaline and noradrenaline and cortisol. So there are two different three different types of arousal that determine how alert you become, or actually you become aware that fields in your stomach so the arousal that you feel is a compound of this If you didn't resolve in that in that detail in our model, because it's very difficult to do this, and you will have to do a lot of empirical work. And when you want to actually model how people react to different situations, of course, we invite them to check arousal apart into these components

Unknown 1:05:13
in the literature of arousal is really quite confusing. There's no general consensus that there is one kind of arousal. In this model,

Joscha Bach 1:05:21
it's mostly the RSD or ascending reticular syndrome.

Unknown 1:05:29
That would look corny, but I think the point that Josh was making before that goes back to these traditional models, is emotions are just points inside an image, in this case, a sequential space, I understand that, we must understand that the dimensions are the regular. And I think now, what George is doing is just placing specific

Joscha Bach 1:05:56
we don't need to agree on exactly how every culture does this, right. So but but I think this country is mostly what you and me what we are whatever it is, if you if not speak up, and so, sadness is about the manifest perfection of all conceivable based on reaching your active rather than goal. There was no relevant obstacle anymore that you could remove to get there. So, for instance, your child has died. And there is nothing you can do about this. There is nobody you can sanction for it and so on. So in this situation, you can only retreat from the situation, you have low arousal, you have high negative valence, and you have decreased extreme readiness and you might seek support from the environment. Pride takes basically a situation of high competence, which is so low security rate, high internal legitimacy, and lack of coincidences high external legitimacy, because it's very often happens when somebody was praised. And joy is a state of higher arousal with a high perceived reward from satisfying the demand and bliss is a high perceived for where to go from satisfying the demand. But low arousal, great difference between joy and bliss is mostly in the arousal dimension. And this is related to for instance, you often get joy when you do something that is connected to physical exertion. So you want to raise that into your it's probably not bliss or joy. And you listen to supply for three you have low arousal, because you need to have great eye resolution to do this. So, the situation is probably not too much dry as it looks. But if you want to implement this, you want to date or has a minimum maximum to define the range of particular that was in at a given time. And the baseline that is its normal range, if you leave it alone and discern volatility and indicate time. Then we define how this changes and we do this by heavy combinations of this the variance is a combination of all the different pleasure and pain signals that you'll receive in a certain moment or over a given time, the implementation of arousal is done by combining the urgency the urgency and the right way. And the aggression integration is implemented this competence, which is the gender cap task specific competence that you have for the currently active for the general competence and a combination of them then go to the viewer and basically visualize the emotions in real time. So, here we have the physiological needs, here we have this social needs, here we have the cognitive needs, this is how they interact to form the different modulators and these are the compounds to this outer ring, here is the valence, and in here, we have the grip strength and the general urge strength again, here we have the urgency, and all these things interact to form the configuration of the agent at a given moment. So now we can go with more personalities, we can take the motivation parameters, to model different personalities. And you can take the motivation parameters to model different temperaments. How would you go about this? So, bottle to work for personality that happens and quality is the big five. The Big Five form has been derived by taking a lot of words that describe personality shaped properties and people from a dictionary and then organizing them and realizing that you can be organized roughly into five dimensions and these are openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, introversion, agreeableness, and curiosity system. So for disruptive needs is your openness is your appreciation of art and your ideas and curiosity. It's also somewhat correlated to IQ. conscientiousness is how much you are worth following and discipline versus coding and spontaneous extraversion calcium, how much you tend to seek stimulation from your environment versus avoiding it when you're introverted. And the agreeableness tells you how likely you are to try to please your interaction partners and their social interaction or conversation. And neuroticism tells you how stable or how robust they get you're against failure. So, if you can model this by the point the person was hiding for evaluation would score higher and openness and extraversion and agreeableness. And a person that is higher in competence would have lower human expenses. That's a person that gets more out of winning an argument about pleasing the other, that argument. And

Joscha Bach 1:10:36
so look strapping like this, imagine you take your physiological, social and cognitive means, and for some reason, psychologists ignore the physiological ones, they're probably very interesting differences in whether people are hungry all the time. And this affects the way their condition works, or are extremely high libido. But you must look at the social and cognitive urges that the measure of is our questioners. And then basically, each of these is characterized by, again, a reaction to satisfaction by the loss prevention to frustration, and the decay of often you need to replenish this before it has been dried by itself. And the relative strengths come down from the outlets. So we want to CISM can be modeled by having a stronger way to experience negative emotions and have a strong loss on competence when things in your mind don't go according to plan, and uncertainty reduction, and also making strong details on these things. Conversely, if these things are low, you will have no neuroticism extraversion, that might be modeled by having a strong gain from affiliation. So you get a lot of interaction, and also as from decay on affiliation. So you need to replenish it often. And maybe also a weak negative reaction to frustrations in social interaction. So you don't get a lot of other things out of us over indirect effects. And if you have the opposite of you basically have an extremely strong loss of affiliation, maybe a small decaying affiliation, you will tend to be more of an introvert. Openness can be strong gains, especially on the cognitive needs. And agreeableness is the result of a strong positive and negative reward for affiliation. And to know, again, for competence. And conscientiousness, might be a result of having an extremely strong loss of competence when something doesn't go according to plan. If you're a person that gets a lot of gain, and a competence and things go to plan, and don't know, have a strong loss incompetence, you get bored easily if you follow through on plans. So my wife and son is extremely high conscientiousness, she wants to plan the work out and make all the future, make sure that things happen the way they have a plan. For me, it's the opposite, I get terrified that this is the case. So the nice thing, the big failure, one of the variables, which is much nicer is much faster model by not just one thing, but by so many variables. And the reason is that of course, you can visit Big Five one that many things are difficult to model, for instance, there's a difference between China's and introversion, a shy person is interesting that somebody was interesting and integrate, it's a person that put want to get something out of the affiliation, but as their two because they have such a strong plus and affiliation, if something goes wrong, and maybe also a stronger loss of competence if something goes wrong. So there is stronger anticipated pain, in the case of a failed interaction. But there's also a strong, frustrated need for interaction, the shy person versus an introverted person wouldn't get anything out of the interaction in the first place and would rather want to stay at home, they are then interacting with people. And if you do this was a single variable, you cannot resolve this difference. So the idea is that the big five are not natural kinds, they address clusters that you get when you have a reasonably consumable motivational and emotional system. And then you vary the parameters based on a normal ecological spread, but you can and then you start clustering your individuals and then you get your big five

Joscha Bach 1:14:16
How can we evaluate such a model of motivation once again so interesting games were construct something that was very startup is Space Invaders, but these games are, don't give you many opportunities to branch right? It's mostly about avoiding to die such a game, and you want to have a game that is more open ended. So something like this Space Invaders was roughly the same time as the first multi player dungeon adventure, and later on to get much more advanced, much clearer dungeon adventures that are also been designed to satisfy many, many different player types personality types. So the goal is to offer something for everyone in these games, which allows us to study different types of behaviors in the same game. Right. And the first larger work was done by Richard Parker. He took people in such a multiplayer game 700,000 of them and compare their strategies and behaviors. And he decided that they are different clusters of people. And the dimension that you came up with is that a socializers, which made me play this game to interact with other players, then there are killers, which also like to interact with other players, but largely in a competitive way. And then there are the explorers, which want to see as much as possible of the environment. And then there are the achievers, but try to maximize the skills. Right? If you ever played such a game, you will have found similar traits and other people, maybe in yourself. And now the interesting thing is we can map this into ArcSight model. So in this dimension, we have aggregation, how much do you want to interact with others socialize, and here we have uncertainty reaction in this dimension, by this exploration, in this direction, we have competence. So it's pretty natural for them. So we use this model on a number of different games. And we found that it's possible basically to pacify people to pay based on what they do, and multiplayer online games, and to socializers supporters, killers, universe explorers and humanists. So depending on whether you're into aesthetics, or exploration, or competence, to dominance, or nurturing, or affiliation, you get different clusters in your preferred strategies and the game, if you ever do it, the behavior of good players over a long enough time.

Joscha Bach 1:16:47
So how does the self get influenced by our emotional manipulation, but in the last talk, I talked about how to derive our models or sensory patterns by organizing them into percepts and motor scripts, and to depress it into more complex features. And these will abstract them into objects. Eventually, they have to go up and it's made from objects and processes and maps. And they are combined to make simulations, right. So we live in this world of this embedded simulations that generated in our brain. And over these simulations, and objects and processes, and maps and motor actions and complex features, that form concepts, concepts are basically address space of these things, right, so you can manipulate them and recombine them into new things. And then you can also learn a symbolic language, which hangs into the in the scenario between speakers. And the problem of natural language is to take this conceptual domain, which is something like a hierarchical fuzzy distributed graph, and map it into a discrete string of symbols. There's a stack depths no more than four. And the solution to this is probably the space of all natural languages. Right? So there is an evolutionary paradigm in which we can develop and learn languages and start sharing these concepts for going from, that's an experimental thing. Basically, when you think about how many relative clauses you can process reliably, and you probably can do seven, but you also have to talk to other people, at some point, they will look at somewhere else, when you talk with them, you notice this, you would use the stack of depths of your sentences. So this is a very rough number. But basically, you only have a very limited stack and parsing these grammars, it's the idea that you want to minimize that.

Unknown 1:18:31
Sure, but the point is, what's internally generated is again, compressed in terms of expression, right? So you might have, in that sense, different sticks that you're looking at. Yeah, listen to what yeah. But okay.

Joscha Bach 1:18:46
So, we have this podium conductor, which performs every prediction and modeling and it maintains the short term political trends and procedural memory, the biographical memory, which are derived from the short term protocol, right, when you think about what did I do in the past, this is composed of at least in the short term protocol, which are transferred into this long term protocol. And what are the things that were extracted from your short term protocol things that you read in the news things that happen every day that you put into a procedural memory of what happened? What happened was that you generalize into sequences. So this is an election cycle, this is a season this is the year and so on this coming year is going to pan out. So we have primary model is the agent and its environment we have a secondary model, which is about the interaction of the agent with the environment. And the tertiary model is this the functioning of that secondary modeling? How do we make that model is typically what we call the self consciousness in this paradigm, largely serves as a model of our attention and control of its effort relation depend on the learning function representations in our political structure, and we have a number of biases on what we pay attention to, for instance, most of us are extremely good at recognizing faces. And I have had two colleagues my career which could not recognize faces. They were cognitive scientists that were highly functional people. One of them was an excellent musician, not cognitively impaired, but not able to tell students apart by their faces. So they have to do this find the hairstyle on Vengaboys and the height. And they also don't pick up on facial cues, they don't realize when they talk to the students about how to generate that it says that they choose and as soon as long tuned out, because they don't read their facial expressions. And I think the reason for this is not that they have a particular brain defect, but they lack a particular brain defect that all others of us have, which means an extraordinary amount of attention to faces, is you have a bias that rewards us for looking at faces. In particular, when you walk through a crowd, you obsessively look at faces, more than you think about sex. It's crazy. And as a result of looking at all these faces all the time, you form very intricate models of what these faces are expressing, right. And what we see in these faces is not really the face, one of my students told me, she has a superpower, she can see faces and power outlets. And so it's basically happens to most of us, right? But she said, Oh, there are no faces and power outlets. And I told her the dirty, dark secret, there are no faces on people, right? There's only two arbitrary. The fact that you see a thing with an attentional state and emotional expression, and so on. It's a major trick, semantic information overlaid on this perceptual state. It's really cool. When you think about it, right? There is no face on a person, it's only geometry. And the face is very distinct from geometry. And if you don't see the actual emotion of that person, what you see is the state of your emotion model of that person superimposed on this direction, when they're looking at you, right? So you don't see whether this person is red or happy or something to see your model of the state of that person superimposed on on that right, person. And just think about this. Also, I suspect that emotional expression hasn't evolved as a convenient readout to our emotional states. Why would they do this, I think something slightly more nefarious has been going on. When the art social agents, we want to model others, we will use cues to model their internal states, of course, right. So we look at their posture, to gather information about the arousal, we look at their gaze direction to see what they attend to. And if their conclusion is internal, or external, and so on, you look at facial cues to see what their valence is, whether they experience pain, or pleasure, and so on. And then we guide them what kind of emotional cluster they are in. And it doesn't stop there, this other agent knows that you're looking at them, evolution figures out that you're looking at them. So this day, it will tricks to gain your perception of their emotion, right. So suddenly, they know they expect you to show a particular thing. And it's not conscious. It's basically what happens in the course of an emotional trajectory in a social species. So they evolve something like a default readout for emotional states that you are meant to save that there they are in. So now you've been trained to look for the differential between the default state that you would expect them to be in and given context. And they actually expression that you start to resolve in this one, this small delta. And this leads to a co evolution which leads to a differentiation of the emotional expression. So I suspect that emotion recognition, especially with respect to facial expression, is a result of an adversarial evolution of emotional deception and emotion recognition.

Joscha Bach 1:23:49
But this is very hypothetical. I don't know how we could test for this, but probably we can this is as efficiently simulations. So potential is a mechanism for directed learning. And the differential access happens via an attentional protocol. And the structure of our cell of our internal regulatory hierarchy determines how we experience our emotions. So as to which of these affective states we have the exponential axis? And what is the relevance of that exponential axis. This determines how we experience our emotional state. And the object of the emotion requires a representation and relevance of that emotion. For instance, you cannot be jealous if you think that your partner making out to somebody else is not relevant, right? You also cannot be jealous if you don't think that we have a partner who's making out with somebody else. You need to have these two things right you need one of these components is missing. You cannot tell us so in order to have these elements, you need to have you correct social urges because it's often emotion so you need to have education and romantic appetite in the middle and dominance. If you don't have that certain social emotions will not be present. And past there are people which are a romantic people which are incapable of falling in love. There's definitely that these people don't laugh or don't have libido, they just don't fall enough. And typically, these people are incapable of jealousy. So this fixation on a single partner seems to be the result of romantic effects, which is a particular dimension of social emotions. That is not the norm. Not all people have similar weight, there are people which are asexual, these are people that can often fall in love, but they don't have any sexual arousal. And they think about other people, and they're not sexually attracted to other people. It's not that they're repulsed, it's just absent, it's an absence of a particular kind of drive, and affects a small percentage of the population. So the existence or non existence of these particular needs, is something that is different in different people. And because the social urges the selection, pressure is not as strong as the physiological urges, if you've never hadn't been probably won't have offspring. But you don't need the need to make very often in your life to have offspring, the social emotions don't have the same selection pressure, so you would expect more variation in them. If you think about love, as opposed to romantic effects, and libido, there's something else going on, right. So when I say I don't love Coca Cola, I mean, Coca Cola is not sacred to me. When you talk about laughter, as we truly mean it, it's about discovery of the sacred and the other. Now, that sounds very important and romantic, right. But it simply means the sacred is a system of meaning above the level of my ego. My ego is a function that integrates expected reward over the next 50 years or so. And there are things that I do in the absence of expected reward in the next 50 years or so. And this is typically what we associate this values, right, the value is what makes you go for stuff in the absence of expected report.

Joscha Bach 1:26:53
You do this anyway, because it's the right thing to do. Which means it serves a purpose that you put above your ego, it's a system of meaning that is more important than you. And when you see somebody else serving that system of meaning, that is more important than you can help them without expecting anything in return and not be confused. If you only have your ego as your top level function, which means if you're a sociopath, like about five 6% of the population probably is also fast, then you can only have transactional relationships. In order to give something to somebody that thing has actually to be rational you have in countries, you need to expect something in return. And often you get something in return. But it needs means you have to maintain a reputation system unsuitable incentives. And the problem is reputation systems don't scale about a few other individuals, right? About 150 160 individuals, you lose track of who did what when, which means if you have a tribe, if you organize only with a reputation system, then this tribe is not going to scale beyond 150 households. Right? After that it falls apart, the cooperation becomes very weak. How do you organize a tribe into something that is non transactional? How do you get non transactional relationships, you do this by having purposes, regulation goes above the level of the individual. And for instance, religion or tools to create shared purpose is to make purposes converge above the level of the individual, right. So now, this discovering of shared purpose is the discovery that somebody serves the purpose more important than their ego, in the same purpose as us nothing about the ego. So if they want to do something to serve that, you should have that. Because where they want to go, this is where your universe wants to go to. It's no suddenly very natural and very easy to do this, right. And that depends on that other one not be corrected to the other one serving that purpose truly. And honestly, corruption means that they actually serve something else that you are not serving. So love is basically if you wish, in the last month transactional interactions, and that requires shared purpose and an implementation of this meet were intended to mislead the performance to internalize norms.

Joscha Bach 1:29:07
So there is a theory by Robert Keegan, psychologist from Harvard, who looked at personality development as starting like a succession of reverse engineering your own mind. And I don't think it's very accurate as a development theory because I have different kids and they didn't develop exactly in the order, as he suggests, but I think philosophically, it's a very interesting theory. So it starts out with this observation when you are having an infant, what they experience is pleasure and pain in a very pure sense. It seems that when this baby cries, everything is pain. There is no anticipation of future pleasure. It's total. And this baby is is joyful, everything is joy. Everything is beautiful. And the whole universe is pleasure. There is no anticipation of future pain, it changes quite abruptly. Right? And at some point, this small Mindstorm To generalize, and integrate this and realizes oh my god, there is a succession of pleasure and pain, and my finger at some point, the over my pleasure will at some point be over. And they get less excited about these things, and more based on their anticipations. And then they learn that pleasure and pain are not the reverse, but they are aspects of the things that they encounter. And then later, they realize, oh, no, they're not aspects of the things I encounter. They're aspects of my reaction to the things that I encounter, right. So you learn pleasure, and pain is a property of the self, not of the environment. And then they learn, I am not pleasure and pain, in the experience of pleasure and pain, I am the thing that wants to get pleasure in pain or wants to avoid this. So they identify the staples. And when they do this, they're typically two or three years old, and then they cannot reach or they throw a tantrum, they get extremely excited. And it's because they cannot identify with anything beyond this goal. Basically, the subjective they feel they die, and they don't reach that goal, because this is the index of the currently active behavior program. And they don't have to do a program train that could switch between behaviors. Instead, they have a behavior problem that wants to reach that goal cannot let go. And if they reach it, can this be bubble wrap can die down and go to sleep, and something else will emerge. But if it cannot reach it, then it's become super urgent, because it's really afraid of dying in a way. So it's not small children, testing the patients of their parents, it's really small children not being able to let go, if they think that's physically impossible, it's very interesting to observe this in your case. And so at some point, you realize the goal is not what I am going to what I have, and I can have different goals. And then at some point, you make this inference that peoples have more tools, and that can change them. And this is what Keegan calls the Imperial phase of your baby starts directing others and push them around age 24, and so on. They make others do their bidding, largest extent that they can. And then they realize, also, I'm not my own, I have them. What I have is beliefs. What am its beliefs, like there's a certain way the world works. And there are different kinds of beliefs and they are produced that are right, and things that are wrong? And how do I pick up the right beliefs and to look at my environment. So my peers have beliefs that are more right than mine. And when I'm able to understand the beliefs of my peers, especially those that are high ranking, so to say this, in this regard, is basically how much data should I assign to that leaves in case of conflict, then I'm done, I'm done, then I'm able to emulate the beliefs of my environment. And this is what Keegan calls stage three of the development of the self. This is basically when you are able to approximate the beliefs of your environment and think that the right beliefs are given by your peers. And this is the stage that most people are in.

Joscha Bach 1:32:47
And only when you discover epistemology, and you discover, oh, there are lots of ways to discover truth, and the nature of the confidence must equal the strength of the evidence. And it's it's completely uncorrelated with what other people seem to be true. You can agency over your beliefs, right? Whether mathematics is true does not depend on what other people think, whether the country will crash or whether the Apple stock will go up or down. It's completely independent of what other people think is true. There's an interaction is their actions, of course, because of their beliefs. But objectively whether this is true or false, is not related to whether it's right or wrong. And then you realize, oh, my god, people mostly live in the right room, I was abroad. And you shouldn't be living in a true false algebra instead, right? And right and wrong. shortfalls are very distinct categories. So once you go from red one to two faults, you make a step where you get to Keegan for you become self authoring, because you don't have agency over what you think is true, you know why you think something is true. And you can make a decision about whether you should continue seeing that as he was to arrive, right. And it doesn't stop there. The next thing is that US dis identify from your values, you realize that you are not your values, but you have your values, and different people have different values. And if they have different values, it means that completely different behavior and logic and flow out of them. So suddenly, we realize that history is not the struggle of large groups of good people against large groups of bad people and up to God's good graces and be one of the good ones. But rather, it's a struggle between people who's different systems of values, some of which are more or less sustainable than others. Right. And so at this point, you can start modifying because you get free to choose your values to understand the values of others. Enter discussion with John Mackey, who unfortunately is not here anymore. But I've found that doesn't really stop there. At some point, you can also make decisions about the structure of yourself. So basically transform the type of mic that you are. Okay, but I think I need to hear and stop this lecture for now because my favorite one

Joscha Bach 1:34:57
thank you I was wondering how did you deal with conflicts. So what happens when you have a particular drive so you are hungry, and you make a decision that you want to go to a shop to buy something to eat, and on the way from yourself, you get very thirsty. And at some point, it's yours becomes normal, it's stronger than the hunger. So you drop what you're doing, you go back home, because you realize that my fridge, I had something to drink. This is not a good strategy, right? Because it means that you now wasted your effort of going to the store, or at least half of that effort. And you should not be doing this next, why we introduced this depression thing, which makes you more stubborn, based on your current goal, which means you give a bonus to the currently active behavior, once you're committed to it, and this is an adaptive thing. And you learn in the course of individual development, how stubborn you should be to reach most of your goals, right? It's it's small heuristics that makes it possible. And otherwise, you basically go by an hour model by an expected reward thing. So you're How much do you get out of satisfying this particular need, multiplied with the cost efficient Bates method, reward smaller the effective reward and the risks involved. And the opportunity cost that you lose basically, by giving up on the other things that you could do in between this is roughly what you want to approximate in any public of architecture, dirty

Unknown 1:36:37
calculators, in your columns, how to abstract needs into more general and more abstract data approaches that can be used for concatenation of different meanings, or predictions of future needs that are not just the basic ones.

Joscha Bach 1:36:59
So the basic ones are the physiological, the social and the cognitive needs. And right now what we came up with is a set of needs that seems to be orthogonal to us and sufficient to explain the different behaviors and what you should also be able to look at as lesions of this. So basically, two people can deviate in their goals systematically in a way that would suggest that there's a critical need dimension that is absent in them. You can find those for instance, in a romantic people versus asexual people. These are different needs that are absent in them and you can explain it but really what needs not being implemented

This transcript was generated by https://otter.ai