Unknown 0:05
So welcome to day two of 2018. We just heard this summer school ever. But I say that every year that no one's worse. So anyway, when it's true, and else today will be the best day of the best workshop ever. That kicks off with OSHA. OSHA is doing an initial training in the computer science, Department of science. And from there, he then jumps into a much broader domain of, let's say, mind a patient. And I know Joshua, for a few years now, and he's currently at the Harvard program. And everything that makes we're trying to figure out what he's really trying to achieve there. But I'm sure we're gonna find out today, why I want to Joshua to join us in in summer school is a very broad perspective on issues like computation in mind, but also with components that are going to be open very surprising. And initially, I really annoyed the hell out of me. But then when you think it's true, that are important challenges in these observations. So Rachel T, he joins us. And we're really lucky, because that's gonna give two talks this week. So it is really fantastic. So Josh, out great that you're here. Thank you very much for joining us.

Joscha Bach 1:34
Good morning. Thanks for being here at this ungodly hour. As Paul just said, basically, my foray into academia was fueled by a desire to find out why this is happening to us. What is the nature of our relationship to reality? What are we what is reality itself? This was the question that I wanted to get closer to. And this was what led me into academia. I still remember sitting in front of my Commodore 64, in the early 1980s. And I just realized that everything that I can think of I can put into the screen and display on the screen, so this screen becomes a window into an arbitrary world. And that means I can put any anything I want. And I saw Well, what do I want to put in there? And the obvious answer was, I want to put a world in their world like ours, maybe more interesting than ours will with entities that I can talk to, and that we can relate to, and so on. And so when I thought about how to make this happen, I studied computer science and philosophy and philosophy, at least where I studied this was largely useless for this. I think, for historical reasons. Most of the people that want to do philosophy left that particular room, at some point, it went into other rooms. So I tried to get into these other rooms. And this is, in a way the trajectory that got me here. When we think about what it means to be intelligent, our field AI started in the 1950s, largely because people like Marvin Minsky and John McCarthy realized that psychology isn't going anywhere after Piaget, and that in order to understand minds, we need to make testable theories, which means theories that you can run into in machines. And at that point, people didn't know what intelligence is, the situation in 1950 was somewhat similar to the situation in 1650, then biologists started to try to understand life. And then you live by reference so they could point living things. And they could also point at stuff that was probably nonliving. And they didn't know what the operational distinction between those two words, I mean, finding out what the nature of life is, was one of the big projects of the science of biology eventually, right now we know it just sells everything that sells that is life and everything that's not sales is not life. It's the dynamics of sales. Sales are small molecular machines that are able to harvest Nick entropy from the environment, self replicate, and the small Turing Machine pretty literally Turing machine like this DNA tape with read write head that implements a cellular automata transition function, which enables cells to build organisms and to modify their state. And when we think about intelligence, we can best understand it, I think it's the ability to make models. Intelligence is not the same thing as being smart, which I would say is the ability to reach your goals, or as being bias, which is the ability to pick the right goals. A lot of people that are extremely good at making models are not very wise or very smart, right? Often in excess of intelligence, and people might be a prosthesis for an absence of wisdom, or an absence of smartness. If you don't reach your goals, maybe you need to make more models, right? So what's a model? A model is a set of relationships between changes in information information is the fancy word for discernible differences. It's the ultimate thing that the universe is giving us is not matter or energy or sound or people or whatever or reality it gives us discernible differences. And the meaning of information is its relationship to change and other information. So, if you have a blip on your retina, the meaning of that blip on your retina, is the relationship that you discover to other blips on your retina at the same time, or different points in time, the model that your brain makes the set of relationships identifies is there might be a 3d world is moving people that exchange ideas, right? And there are some blips, but you don't discover such a relationship, no relationship at all, these are noise and there is a lot of noise on our retina. So in some sense, our brain is a machine to count impulses on the retina or more generally on the talent was explained them by making models and the nature of modeling and what is a function that map's patterns to other patterns. Modeling is a function approximation. So we our function approximator is in some sense.

Joscha Bach 5:52
So how did a I go about this function approximation since 1950, we had something which we could call first order artificial intelligence or good old fashioned AI or classical AI. What happened there that people identified some problem that required people to be intelligent, like playing chess, or disassembling sentences in natural language. And then they came up with an algorithm that would make that possible, right. So they wrote an algorithm to play chess directly. And now we have a second wave of AI. Usually on the other name, deep learning and deep learning is actually compositional function approximation. That would be a better name. But it's a mouthful. And what it means is that we don't write these algorithms directly anymore, but that we write algorithms that learn that functionality themselves that discover it, so we don't write the program to write go directly. But instead, we write a program that discovers how to play Go in. This enables us to solve problems that are too complicated for our minds to write down the solution directly. And instead, you write down a meta solution write a way to approximate this particular kind of function. This means that now instead of optimizing a function that has a few billion parameters, like how to recognize cats from dogs, we only optimize a function that has 2000 parameters, which is maybe the TensorFlow program to approximate this function. And I mean, you already see where this leads, this means that we will probably go to the next stage at some point, at the moment, our learning systems, the functions that you learn are mostly artificial neural networks, which are chains of normalized weighted sums of real numbers. And we train them this back propagation and stochastic gradient descent. So it means we organize them into layers, and we define some error function. And then we propagate this error function, which gives the deviation of your neural network to the intended result, and propagated through the layers and set each of these weights a little bit in the right direction. Hopefully, to approximate this function. It's a very slow process that is many magnitude slower than the processes that run our rates, which means we haven't discovered about algorithms yet. Might be meta learning. So instead of writing functions that learn functions, why not write functions that learn how to learn, right? And this third order AI meta learning, it's very tempting that our brain is not a gigantic system, but a meta learning system, a system that learns how to learn your new domain, because different domains might require different learning strategies. And from this perspective, our evolution is a very slow and unprincipled search for meta learning systems like BBC that evolution doesn't always converge. And it almost didn't make us happen. Since half a billion years, we have multicellular organisms. And then evolution developed into more and more structured organisms, the larger these organisms become, the more slower this evolution gets. And there's this problem that sometimes you get a local optimum vary some brain dead reptile that doesn't really scale into general intelligence eats all the abstract mammals that try to become larger, have longer childhoods, and bigger food chains. So they can have larger and better generalizing brains, but they never get there, right? Because the reptiles eat them. So you need a supervolcano or immediate or to reset the search from time to time a little bit and break it out of the local optimum. And now here we are, and you only have one probate that maybe has been in years to go before us was the atmosphere. So it almost didn't happen. Visit the same order of magnitude, in which life on Earth is possible. Right? So it's very good thing. You are the first species that has discovered that evolution is the thing. You are the first species that is going to leave more phones than bones in the ground. There is no nobody but before as seem to have invented computers. And it was so many things that are necessary to make that happen. Right. Good. Six 60 million years worth of old trees in something like a century and feet that probably no other civilization after us is going to be able to pull off And without that, you probably wouldn't have gotten where we are. So it's third or AI going to carry us to human level intelligence and beyond, perhaps Perhaps even second order. Yeah, it's going to be enough. But if it's not, then we maybe have to go to meta search, you have to find the general theory of search. And there are probably optimality criteria, when you think about, is there an optimal way to find truths and optimal algorithm to find those. But you could add priori show that there are always infinitely many solutions to a problem. So it might not, on the other hand, most universes are not possible, right? So if you apply this thing, it might make the universe learnable.

Joscha Bach 10:43
But if we think about systems that find rules, we ask ourselves, Is it possible that we are in a universe that can be uncovered or uncovered in such a way basically, in mechanical universe, a universe where there are no conspiracies? At what level? And in our culture, the null hypothesis is that we are based on a conspiracy, right? There is God a supernatural, intentional being that created us, there is dualism, there is some interaction with some mystical soul and the physical universe. And it's a very unique set of non hypothesis that is unique to this particular culture, not that much to cultures in general to human humanity in general. But if you look at our science and philosophy in the West, it's largely an attempt to defeat this weird null hypothesis of super supernatural events happening. It's very near to Vietnam hypothesis to have because the guy coming down from the mountain after having talked to a burning bush, what kind of case does he have? Right? So it's something that's really a result of our particular kind of cultural trajectory? And one of the biggest questions that remains because of this, that hypothesis is what is the nature of our relationship to reality? What is our consciousness? What is the nature of our phenomenal experience? How is it possible that the machine can feel anything and experience anything? And when I entered AI, there was also the biggest question that I had for myself, how is it possible that a system can feel that you can experience anything? And the first story that I looked at was emotion? How can you explain emotion? What is emotion, and what gives rise to our goals? I'm going to talk about these things in more detail in the second lecture, I think they have to tomorrow. And today, let's go headlong into the one, it might be the more tricky one, right? Or the moment series for most of us, what is consciousness, but I have this objective experience that my experience is continuous. And it's clearly not, it's something that's being pasted together afterwards. So if we think about consciousness, we can think of it as something like Kaminsky holding a suitcase to a bunch of different functionalities that have to be present together. And there is some core functionality of awareness. And to this core functionality belongs that I have something like a local perceptual space and idea of where I am right now. And the things around me and my often focus on my proprioception, I have access to procedural content. I have a current world model in general, which contains the fact that I'm in Barcelona, even though I cannot really see them in Barcelona, I have directed attention to can be put on my cognitive processes or my perception, which basically means outwards. This attention can also be wide or focused on a particular thing. And I have access to be able to follow concepts in my mind and episodes are mental simulations. And they can manipulate and create new concepts and episodes and simulations and other mental states where things can play out. And this core togetherness is also available in dreaming, right, there's a difference between the conscious states of dreaming and being fully awake. And these are in this dreaming state, I'm still conscious, I still have a mental stage, I can shift things around, I still have attention that I can direct, I still have Skype disorder have a role model, even though it's a very different one. And in that state, I don't have access to sensory perception, I usually only have access to a very small part of my memory, I might even not know my name, it might be very difficult to achieve object permanence and dreams and so on. And it might not even be possible to commit to actions and follow through on them, we usually don't have agency in dreams. And there is an intermediate stage, lucid dreaming and the lucid dream. We have agency typically, and we can bootstrap ourselves into the awareness that we are dreaming, but am I unable to remember that I'm my body is this day in Barcelona, because I'm just encapsulated in dream world that doesn't give me access to that kind of knowledge. And then there is a state that goes beyond awakeness where for instance, you can learn new things. Not all people that are fully awake can still learn they might have lesions in their brain or dementia and so on. So we have a bunch of competency. It's not all people have the same competencies, but they still define different sets of conscious functionality. And then their estates in meditation when you sit down and you might tune out your sensory experience and don't have access to them anymore. But in return, you get access to other things, you get access to much lower level perception and awareness and so on, due to tuning out things, and due to maybe turning off language. And you have altered states of mind, like psychosis and dragging us states, which again, have this overlap to a lot of the other states and all of them what they have in common is some core values functionality.

Joscha Bach 15:35
So in this sense, we can see consciousness is a set of cognitive functions. And each of these functions like the knowledge about your access to percepts, and contact your sense of agency, your social model, the set of the expectations of the immediate future, the influence of the behavior based on your discursive thoughts, and so on. The ability to form memories, reasoning, constructing plans, following plans, is to signal your mental states to other and so on, to let goals at work goals that are unattainable. All these are large parts of functionality that may or may not be missing in different situations and define what we call different conscious states, right?

Unknown 16:10
Aren't you know, missing content of consciousness with the process of conscious

Joscha Bach 16:16
you get there? So I'm just trying to define different conscious states based on the functionality that inhabits them. So not all conscious states are characterized by the same kind of functionality. So we have this consciousness as a functionality versus the feeling of what it's like, right, this is probably what you're getting at. And there are some people like, for instance, Giulio Tononi, and his theory has been adopted by Christoph Cole, who came up with some measure of integrated information. So basically, you have an unconscious state in which representations are largely unconnected, you have some minimally conscious states in which there is some correlation between the different parts of your cortex and so on. And then in the fully conscious state recordings is largely correlated, there is a measure of this correlation of the information in your brain, which he calls finds the measure of information. Integration is what he considers to be the degree of consciousness that you're in, the thing has some problems with it. You can have, for instance, have a sleepwalker that still have a nicely integrated cortex. But you can ask the sleepwalker there's nobody home. There's also this thing, you can construct a metro computer matrix operation that maximizes fights with roof, according to his measure, and it's probably not going to be conscious, even though we have to say to turn on his credit, that he's biting the bullet and says, Oh, well, it probably is conscious then. And but this is another issue, right? So he believes in some sense that consciousness cannot be explained by information processing theory. And then he goes right ahead and construct an information processing theory to explain consciousness, which I mean, it gets my respect, but it's doomed, obviously. So one of the problems with this theory is that it is not describing necessary and sufficient conditions for conscious may be necessary once though, I mean, if you want to look for a thing that is conscious, it's probably a good idea to look into places of the universe, where information is tightly integrated. But there is this issue that it also has to do with the way information is being processed in space. Imagine you have a computer program, and he would compute a particular kind of function. And then you rearrange the computer program over the hardware in such a way that different parts of the hardware, I now calculate this in a distributed fashion and the thing would become more conscious. I don't think this is a feature of the theory. That's it, that's a back. You don't want to have that. So I don't think that ultimately, this is a very good theory. It's an attempt to explain something that seems to be so mystical to him that he tries to find something that would explain why it's not explainable. What do we mean by conscious experience, if you look at the phenomenology of consciousness, what it feels like to be conscious, if you meditate for a few hours, and you go down to the deepest level, it seems to me that I get to something like a pain, there is some disagreement with the universe. And it is an unstructured disagreement, which means if you focus totally on it becomes monumental and horrible, right? It's, it feels your complete attention. And everything that you start thinking every surface that emerges in your mind, and that stage springs into existence as conscious, very weird. It has something like prospectivity. And it's usually a state in which you're not in because it's the state in which you cannot have reflection in which you cannot have language. And only when you go to the next stage where you become aware of content. It becomes reflective in a way and this is, I think, somewhat similar to what Tononi tries to get at. So basically you sit down and you take in the view of the world without reflecting on it with language or anything else. And you feel it's like an oscillation that spreads and spreads and binds more and more features to one operator.

Joscha Bach 20:16
It's basically the creation of a cohesive view of the world that you are relating yourself to, and that you're aware of. And I think this direct experience of reality, it feels direct, is the state that children are in usually. And when we go into $1, sense, at least most of us scientists and so on, become more conceptual. So it becomes something like consciousness of second order, it's a manipulation of the traces of that consciousness. So my normal state of mind is more like carrying around a glass ball is that light inside of it. And when I do a step, each step that I do, this light becomes a little bit fainter, and more removed from my experience. And then when I reason about this content becomes even further away, because my reasoning itself does not seem to have the property to become part of this global operator, it's more a disintegrated thing. I don't know what it's like for you. I'm just basically describing my own experience when I try to understand my own terminology of consciousness. And my linguistic report about my consciousness knows consciousness only from far distant moves somewhere in the back of my brain, and hasn't really touched it. So when we interact with

Unknown 21:25
it, how important is it for us to also know agree with these definitions of

Joscha Bach 21:29
levels, you don't have to do this. There is no common agreement about the terminology of consciousness and giving you this as a point of reference, you're free to agree or disagree with this. And maybe you have completely different modes of consciousness or experience of consciousness, I find that most people that I talk to in person seem to have something similar depending on how far they focus on the experience. So I think it's part of what we need to explain.

Unknown 21:56
Here, friends, you make a distinction between sort of primary and secondary consciousness, this one, okay, yeah. But then you start to also acknowledge that talk about content and the manipulation of content like this instantaneous, manipulated content was historical, memory, mythical. But now, again, we end up a little bit in this problem of hysteresis, and conditions, because we also know that my brain can't process content, satisfying all these three conditions, be conscious of it. So So then, what I said is that, you'll get there, you'll get there.

Joscha Bach 22:31
So and at this point, I'm not trying to give you a definition, phenomenology of consciousness is basically it's a pointer to tell you, there is a difference between the functionality that we just looked at. So this large list of functions that a system can perform, that you can measure an experiment. And there's also a particular feeling of what it's like, let's find some type of disagreement with the universe. Right? And so, of course, there's a disagreement scene from the inside of that conscious being, it's something that is very distinct from the perspective of the hardware that generates the whole thing. Let's, let's get to this thing. We have you usually experienced the world.

Unknown 23:14
Will you remember that slide you had? Because no

Joscha Bach 23:16
Oreo forgotten it?

Unknown 23:20
Did you mark it in your mind? I would like to put something up on the blackboard and the question period. Yeah, sure. Yeah, that relates to it. Yeah.

Joscha Bach 23:30
Of course. So when we experience the world, we do so with something like a primary model, we have this sense that, that there is an essence to reality or truth that animates us and the world around us, and that we can only ever touch with our cognition. And this thing is actually not the world, it's the primary model that we're having. This is the basic neural networks that model our body and the environment, right. And in order to have access to this and reflect it, we need to have a secondary model. And the secondary model is what we call knowledge. It's a model of the model of reality that we're having. Right? So when we

Unknown 24:05
have a model of the world itself also implies knowledge. No,

Joscha Bach 24:09
yeah, that's, that is knowledge. So the declaration of knowledge that we have is a secondary model over the primary model. So for instance, our primary model has very complicated mathematics in it when you see a toddler sitting on the floor, and the thought of holds a piece of paper and pushes a pencil to it, what that taught us actually doing is proving properties of embedded surfaces in the Euclidean space. It's totally his hypothesis of how this is going to work out. And it's makes very complicated model mathematical models in its brain that later generalize. And of course, the toddler doesn't have declarative knowledge about the toddler doesn't know that it does that at all doesn't have any language to talk about it. And we only teach people this language and very small parts of the universities later on, right. It also tried to teach in school but in a totally useless ways. We teach mathematics typically as an extension of numerosity into accounting. And as soon as that Greek letters this becomes very realistic and suspicious, but we are mathematics is to a large extent, trying to understand what our brain has been doing all along. And the ability to point at these things and making them provable and becoming totally honest with respect to which aspects of them work in which way. So self is the story that the brain tells itself about a fictional person, ultimately a person. If you're a social agent,

Unknown 25:30
why do you limit yourself to the story you tell yourself? I mean, you do have your hypothalamus is measuring what's going on with the body. You later on, we'll hear from Durham about how to brain Michael might not interact with different organ systems, what do you exclude us from the self?

Joscha Bach 25:44
Because it's not part of my self as when I look at it. So when I perceive myself, and the fact that there's a toddler was involved is not necessary nor sufficient. That's part of the implementation of the

Unknown 25:56
UI because you're hungry. Yeah, that's something you experience.

Joscha Bach 25:59
Yes. And that might be part of myself. So part of that story, but it's not my brain that feels grumpy. It's a story that my brain tells itself about the interaction with the world.

Unknown 26:09
You have a user story that really very broad way,

Joscha Bach 26:13
in a very broad way, it's a story that is not just being told, in words, it's the story that is being told in mental ease into this story, basically, in the language of the mental representations.

Joscha Bach 26:28
I would say it's the self model. And it's not really a simulacrum. Yeah. It's it's the content generated in your brain.

Unknown 26:38
That's much better, because story implies there's a narrator. Yeah. And there's, there's also a receiver of that narration, yes. Immediately, you start to get there,

Joscha Bach 26:47
please, let's try to try to get there. It's important. So you're onto something here for

Unknown 26:53
your questions, Joshua. Yes.

Joscha Bach 26:57
So the way I can get to them is, don't interrupt me now, because I'm not postponing them into future lectures, I don't have that many lectures, I'm trying to put it as much as possible into this one. Okay, so

Unknown 27:08
the premises are not clear halfway, and then we're lost at the end,

Joscha Bach 27:11
okay, try to hold the salt, you won't be lost. In the end, I'm trying to string this together. It's just, it's a large operator in this lecture. Okay. So that's the problem with our consciousness is that consciousness, in my view, is a model of the contents of our attention. So we have certain things that were once in our attention. And these are the things that we remember as the things that we had been conscious of. And to get our attention takes quite some time. So for instance, when I take this glass here, and I lift it up, I have a proprioceptive model that takes some time to process and put this into my mouth, and it makes a noise when it blinks against my teeth. And this takes something like probably 70 seconds to process, get into my neocortex, so I can attend to it. And when I swallow this water, I have a simulation of what goes on in my throat, which is very unlikely to what actually goes on in my throat. And this thing, maybe takes half a second to process. And then I feel the movement of my arm at the same time that gets this year, which might take something like 350 milliseconds to process and all these things get strung together, right, they all happen at the same time simultaneously. And I should experience them with some time like, which would be according to the longest modality delay that is necessary to process all the parts. And now the weird thing is that I don't experienced not only the time delay, but they're also experienced that are act in real time or moving that slots. So it's me that acts in real time, not some past self, right. And the fact that I can act on this time delayed information, where the preparation and execution of action also takes something like 700 milliseconds, indicates that I'm not acting on this in real time. Right, this, there's a reactive system that acts on real time, but it's not the self. This itself is a passenger. It's something that only writes piggyback on the whole story, and is being informed afterwards that it did this in real time. Right. So when I delivered this talk, it's not the self that does this, it's not to me that it's an agent here. It's a reactive system that is implemented on all the layers, some of them the backbone, and some of them, the neocortex, and some of them in the cerebellum and so on all over the place. And all this is then strung together in a story that is available some things like a second or more in the future. And they can remember this as the things of having been conscious in real time. Basically, it's a memory of an experience that never really took place. consciousness cannot be actual. And this is thing that is disagreement between what Tony says because Tony basically takes this experience that consciousness seems to be happening in actuality. And he kind of what I realized is that this is not possible in the physical mechanical universe, which is is the reason why he is a function. He's not a functionalist and rejects this notion and tries to find some alternative to it. So what does it mean that something is mechanical, it means that the universe is a collection of moving parts. And so those lowest costs are the close layer. And the interactions are not symbolic, right? If you can yell times today, like in Minecraft, and the sun goes up, you're not living in the mechanical universe, you are living in a universe with symbolic shortcuts universe in which magic is possible. And subjectively, it seems to us that we are living in a mechanical universe, because magic is possible to some degree, but you cannot break the bank. In the dualist system, you have two domains, you have a domain of the moving parts rest extensor, and you have the mental domain Raskog, it turns the domain of the mental content. And if you would go become a computational this, you think that? Well, if you are living in a dream, or if this there is a dream sphere, a dream domain ontologically that's separate from the physics domain, then something must compute this dream domain to write if you find yourself to be a character in a dream that is generated by some kind of mind on a higher plane of existence. And something must compute that mind on a higher plane of existence. Because computation is a very, very general term, it just means that there are discernible differences and changes between them that are not completely random. It's very general description, it doesn't make any assumption about that there needs to be silicon or something else going on. It just says you can describe the domain as discernible states and transitions between them. Sorry.

Joscha Bach 31:45
You can adore something else if you come up with something. So if you can get me out of the computational this tool that is possible to make a constructive description, which means in any language that is not computational this summer works. Go ahead.

Unknown 31:57
So you're saying it's an alternative to materialism?

Joscha Bach 32:01
Oh, it's a generalization over materialism because nobody has seen meta meta is our attempt to encode information in a particular way, right? It's a compression that we find over the available information. So this computation gives a unified perspective on some of the basic fields of philosophy, which is epistemology, metaphysics, and ontology, right. So what kind of computer do we need to run the universe? The simplest case could be that something like my Commodore 64 in 1983, like discrete state machine was finite memory. We could also have something like a probabilistic state machine, various states can branch off in possible futures. And we could have a quantum computer in which each state can also be a superposition of states in the system can be in the overlay of the states. Or we can have the same things but there's infinite memory. And number four, the finite state machine, this infinite memory is your good old friend, the Turing machine. And you can also have a geometric hyper computer that basically moves continuously from state to state. And this is the perspective of traditional classical physics that the universe is geometric. But then there's also possibly the universe is even equals to have a computer. So you can have closed timelike loops, something sends information back from the future into the past, you can use it like next week, lottery numbers, and so on. And all these universes could in theory exist in a particular way. But not all of them can be constructed. So there's a part of mathematics that is constructive mathematics. But this is the part of mathematics that basically runs on a Commodore 64. That is large enough. And that can make puzzles mappings from integers to integers. Basically, everything that you know how to compute, where we can build a computer, that we can construct an automaton that makes it that the game of life or the Turing machine, or Lisp, or any programming language that you can come up with, including HTML, these are all Turing complete languages. And all they can do is a mapping from the integers to the integers. So when you compute real numbers in your computer, of course, they only have a finite resolution, eventually, it's an integer that is interpreted as the real number, right? So there are no real numbers in your computer. In a computer pi is not a number. Pi is a function that gives you digits, you can go get more digits, and eventually you run out of sun to burn to compute more digits. So you're never going to know the last digit of pi. computation was paradigm in the geometric hyper computer that might be different. That is true mapping from the real numbers to the real numbers. So in the geometric universe, you could take two sticks one is square root of two and one is pylon, you push them together, and you add infinitely many digits in one step.

Joscha Bach 34:58
This does not seem to be possible in this you universe in which we're living, it's also not possible to construct a machine, even an abstract mathematics, which does this thing without presupposing that you already have a hyper computer that is able to perform infinitely many steps defined the amount of time. And current quantum mechanics is largely a result of the of our traditional mathematics. It's a mapping from the real numbers to the complex numbers, and back to the real numbers. But it seems to be very, it's to have this all back to the discrete finite state machine. If you think about dualism they have, you have this idea that there are two separate domains, one physical domain, one mental domain, but of course, you can compute them with a single computer, you just take the physical universe, you put it on hold after every cycle, and you compute whatever you want, and you mental domain, feed it back into the physical domain go on. So it will the system is still computational. So this perspective doesn't get you any way out of it. Even an equal. So have a computer where you send information back in time, it's relatively easy to realize in a Turing machine, just need to take a copy of this universe, as it is put it on a stack, then you compute until next week, when you have the lottery numbers, you take the natural lottery numbers, merge them into the stack frame, and retrieve the stack frame and go on. So it's not expensive, you just need memory, to the extent of one universe state, in order to produce N equals we'll have a computer. Okay, but it's only for the people that are interested in computational ism. Interesting thing is that difference between computation and mathematics, which I didn't really understand as a student in which is, in some sense, very significant mathematics is the domain of all possible specifications domain of all formal languages. Most of the specifications that you can may come up with don't make sense, right, you can specify things like the set of all sets, they don't contain themselves, you cannot implement this, it's a paradox just a faulty specification. And computation is the part that can possibly write write the stuff that can be implemented, and they presume that if something exists, it must be implemented somehow right. So, we cannot be in all of mathematics, we can only be in the subset of mathematics, we can actually run which is constructionist mathematics, and many of the things if you're looking at in the philosophy of mathematics, like undecidability, the halting problem and so on, are only issues in classical mathematics as soon as you have a finite system with discrete resolution that you compute this finite automata that is what we actually can implement these things are known issues. So there is of course, this thing, can we escape computational lesson, can we get out there. And once you have a computational system, you cannot construct a non computational system visit, right? You cannot use a computer to build a system and that it can do more than a computer. And our current science, logic language, quantum mechanics are all computational theories that you compute, right? And you write them down in computational languages. And even hyper computation. The idea that something could be continuous, for instance, is a computational idea. And is there a system that can do more something like Tononi hopes for an Penrose hopes for and so all hopes for and so on, I think this would need to be some kind of meta computation operates our computational senses, that cannot be described as our computational languages, and that you cannot deal with so if that thing would exist, if you look at it, it would be indiscernible from the background of our substrate. And this would obviously be something like a pan psychism. Right, you cannot separate this from anything. Because our observation does not distinguish it from the background. And our language cannot extract it in any possible way, there can be no philosophy that can make sense of it. So the search of such a meta computation operator is doomed. There's also that thing, you probably don't need it right? Because what you have to account for financially resolved observations. And you can always construct a computational theory to account for that, you can always write a computer program that produces a pattern on the screen for all patterns on the screen.

Joscha Bach 38:54
So this quest for alternatives to functionalism cannot succeed within a constructionist science, mathematics, the one that we have. Okay. So how do we make sense of the situation that we are in now the idea of this perspective is that we basically live in a dream universe that is produced by a mind on a higher plane of existence. But of course, this thing must be computed somehow, if God is there, and God's mind goes from state to state, something must make it go from state to state. You have to have some I was totally in prime mover at the root of this thing. And this idealist perspective that we live in a dream is characteristic to most Eastern religions and occultism, and so on, and many religious perspectives, and also to many experiential perspectives that people have. And then there's the dualist solution. There are basically two machines one is the universe that produces regular patterns and that is the mind that does encoding and processing and they might be realized in completely different way in different substrates. Even though we cannot know this And then there is the motorist perspective, which is the one that is basically the perspective of most of us are in science, we have some kind of computational universe that produces regular patterns. And also the mind is a set of regular patterns in the regular, the mind isn't set of regular patterns, it has the property, that it can encode the regular patterns at its interface, right? So you share an interface with the universe, if you use this to see a bunch of patterns showing up at our systemic interface with our mind then tries to explain.

Joscha Bach 40:39
And now, I think that decision situation that you find yourselves actually in is a combination of these, I think that both of these theories of idealism, and materialism are in a way true, whether it's Eastern perspective says we live in a dream that is generated by a mind of a higher plane of existence, the vast infrastructure says yes, and the mind is generated by the brain of a primate and its scallop, their primate, their primary lifts in the physical universe, right? So we do find ourselves in a dream. What's the dream generated by the neocortex, the same circuits that produce dreams at night, but use them during the day during the day, they are tuned to predict the next set of patterns from your retina, cochlea, thalamus, and so on.

Joscha Bach 41:23
So how did you do this, we first most of the stuff that we need to regulate the standards, feedback loops in our body, our brainstem has many, many such feedback loops that regulate our breathing patterns, heart rate, and so on. And only if something cannot be done automatically, we need to learn how to do this better and have a reinforcement system that basically tells you what's good, and what's bad. It has this this pleasure and pain signals. And basically, pleasure tells you to more of what you're currently doing pain tells you do less of what you're currently doing. And then there's this difficulty that when pleasure and pain happens, it's already too late. So you need to connect the pleasure and pain to impulses to make you do things. And this gives rise to motivational system. And I'm going to talk about this in the second lecture. And in the hippocampus, you will learn to associate these different needs that you have these different sources of pleasure and pain, the situations in the world. Basically, there are sets of patterns that are connected associated with pleasure and pain. So you could should seek them out out and avoid them. And now we mammals have something that is pretty interesting, that is a system that can generalize over these situations. So it can generalize, for instance, over food sources and come up with the notion of a restaurant. And it can generalize over notion of finding food, foraging and shopping and whatever. So we can construct large plants. And all these things are integrated into one giant model of a surrounding world that allows us to satisfy our needs and avoid their frustration. And a particular way to think about this is a synthesizer in the way our neocortex may be best thought of as something like a synthesizer circuit, most of you will know one, right? So oscillator that is made from some almost randomly but interested in the connected parts, and you have a few knobs that you can twiddle until this thing starts producing the sound that you want. In the case of our ear, our neurons don't want to go at 20 kilohertz. So our cochlea makes a Fourier transform, transform this to an energy spectrum that changes relatively slowly before it reaches the neocortex. And then our brain builds a circuit that tries to predict the patterns coming in from the cochlea. So basically, a sound starts in your brain tries to find some setting of internal knobs to be able to continue with the sound. So it can explain that sound. And once you've done this, you tend to do this also in other domains. So you basically measure your color business synthesizer, or you produce spatial frequency is another synthesizer. And once you've done this exhaustively for a particular domain, you try to generalize over this or you try to find out what two different sounds have in common and you find you can classify them together using the property of pitch. And you can discover the covariance of these color patterns and discover your color space. And you can combine your spatial frequencies in into the colors into some color presets, right. And

Joscha Bach 44:21
it doesn't end here, you can basically build some cross modal representations. And these cross modal representations are simulations of a dynamic world that you subjectively live in. And once you created a few of these simulations, you can generalize over these simulations into concepts which are like the address space of the objects of your mental representations. So our new ones need to then they want to change the binding state love together and something else and a good candidate for what that is the small circuits or cortical columns, columns associate may have something to do number two for years, and you have something in the ballpark of 100 million of those and you you'd probably think of them as a state machine that is being the interface that they're trading against. So they can solve the binary problem, the binary problem is somewhat similar to the bank problem on the internet. So if you have a computer that connects to Google, and Google Analytics, and your news source, and your program all in one session, right, that is a very interesting, stable configuration, that later on is taken apart and binds them to something else. How's that possible, there's a certain protocol that speaks and acts that makes them know that they're talking to each other for a while. And then as they enter sessions are available for other sessions. And they also can make up recessions. And so something like this should be going on, right, which means that we have small units that send signals to the neighbors until they settle into a stable pattern and know, Oh, this guy is talking to me. And they can use the information that this guy has placed at their interface to produce some global operator. And insider says it's more fun to approximator. with humans, pokey isn't equal state network initially. And some things that are used for reward distribution, so the run books, and these units lumped together into areas to stay connected to most of the neighbors and can inhibit them and read values from them, and activate them. So individual units are activated for taking over the neighbors and produce a pattern among the neighbors. And these areas are linked together and processing streams upstream and downstream. So they can represent the Parthenon and hierarchies and so on. We also have long range leads with motivational system and attention on things from the prefrontal cortex that allows them some attentional control of these patterns. And the number of learning so we have this country approximation, which is largely according to Bayesian principles, and parallelizable and is performed an exhaustive modeling of the domains, for instance, engaging and concern. And then we have scripts and schemas is basically like all the things that we learn how to deal with. And then we learn how to program, a combination of those. So we have these spots, a lot of decision problems, and strategies, strategic algorithms that are combined to intervene with these more generalized privatize veterans, that enable our strategies. And you can think about these 50 Something areas of like instruments in an orchestra right here have something like 50 instruments, there's nobody listening to the orchestra, of course, there's no audience to that orchestra. But these different instruments are hearing what instruments in the neighborhood are playing. And take this up and turn this into something more complicated. And the stuff that they're playing is finding water and water patterns, and then sensory patterns producing solid motor patterns, abstractions into Geometry, and spatial structure, and to generative simulations, concepts and linguistic representations and so on. And this whole thing also has some sort of conductor. And if you turn off this conductor, then the it's not clear what this instrument or what this orchestra is playing tonight, basically, you can wake up in the middle of the night, and the fridge and open it and make a meal or walk on the street. But without being fully awake. You could be doing this as a sleepwalker, who sometimes I did this as a child, my wife does it. And when you talk to the sleep worker, you realize there's no one home, it's just an orchestra playing by itself. It's a weird thing to happen. And most of the time during the day, you're partially sleepwalking, but in a way that is tightly integrated, right, you're not consciously aware of most of what these instruments are doing is they're doing just fine. You basically set yourself up to drive a car, and then you drive your car and it doesn't require much attention, if you train your instruments well enough, and the conductor only needs to get in there when the instrument is starting off when there are conflicts between them. Or when you replace a slightly different node, then the conductor gets into it and says, No, change this a little bit or inhibits one or activates one.

Joscha Bach 49:01
And so the purpose of this conductor is potential events and integration of all these things. And I suspect most people currently suspect to feel that it's a combination of what happens to the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex, which has some attentional memory of what you're attending to, and the hardware of the cortex and the insula that maintains the attentional leads into the presence of the cortex. So, you start from sensory perception, and from this you construct district director representations. And then you have conductor which tends to this nose down and select certain things and scales and schemata and they fall apart into the mental station what what what you said what are the procedural memory, the object memory, and the conductor next potential platform. conscious attention is the ability to form index memories according to this model. And you can use this to reinstate your real estate, distribute the Fairhope presentations that are on the purpose of the mall exercise is largely learning. Our brain is a difficulty compared to when you will never, it is not a nice day or architecture that you can train Stochastic gradient descent in general. But having an ROC go backwards through all the layers in a deterministic way. Because our brain has many things that will all replace, there are many things that are recurrent, which go backwards between the layers. And there are many things within the layers, which are better buildings, right? In such a thing, if this is not set up in a highly systematic way possible to pipe the loss function. So the whole brain in such a way that you could know which neurons to correct if your performance is not the right one. So we need a completely different animal. And the most straightforward way of doing this is attention. So imagine you want to be better at tennis, and you make a commitment, you say, Okay, today, I want to move my mechanicals bit differently, and as a result expected to evolve and more more like this. And this means that the other one can catch the ball. And this was obviously manifested in a few minutes from now with the matches won or lost. So what you need to store is, first of all, the binding state of that situation, the binding state that was required in your brain to be able to perform that particular movement in this particular conceptual space. And, of course, that foot space, right, you need to recall the situation that you're in, and the particular movement that you know, then you need to record the changes that you're making the thing that you're doing differently than Normally, you'd need to record the expected change to the outcome. And you need to record the triggering condition. And you know, this is, when this change was manifested in the wealth network, we call this and apply the learning signal, right, and then continue with your game. And then we have one last dimension recall, oh, there was the situation when I decided to make a backhand. And this has played out really well to reinforce it, or this hasn't worked at all. So you undo the change. Right. And for this, you need this index protocol of memory states is the latent variables that allow you to recreate a particular brain state. So this kind of memory is not a recording that we watch, when you sit in your old age in front of the fire, and want to remember what your life was the main purpose of that it's different, it's for carrying information to the future for future learning. And it's very selective. So you don't have to take your vision system that all you trained your vision system for all its various, in the first year of your life, don't touch it again, right? In case, there is no improvement in your vision system, what you only need to change in that case is some part of your movement, some part of your attentional system. And this thing in itself is a tension system that has a problem needs to know versus what and your cognitive architecture. So basically, your brain needs to have some kind of model of where what is stored in your brain. So it knows that which location needs to pay attention if it makes it. And to do this, it needs to train itself, right. So the best way to train this attentional protocol is to do use the attentional system for improving the attention system, which means you will recall many of the events that you attended in this, in this way, your attention becomes more flexible. Right, when you remember, I saw I should be doing this, but instead of doing this, and recall that you've been doing this and should have been doing that, that's a better train.

Joscha Bach 53:29
So your conductor maintains an attentional protocol and thereby generates a narrative about yourself, the access to the protocol gets integrated protocol itself. So on reflection, you'll remember that you have been conscious and remembering having been conscious is necessary and sufficient for explaining by people report but consciousness, right. So this automatically happens, there are people like there's no call for say that the simulation cannot be conscious. And I think they have completely backwards, only a simulation can be conscious, brain cannot be conscious and neuro cannot be conscious. A brain is a physical system and your own cannot experience anything. But forebrain could be super useful to know what it would be like to be experienced in person. So what does the brain to do? It generates a virtual world. And then it creates a virtual character pretty much like a character in a George RR Martin model, but in one generalized perceptual language, and then it does things to that character. And that character is used as a simulacrum to see what it would be like if things are done to that person and what what their personal experience if it could experience anything. And then this person gets access to the language centers and here I am looking at you and oh my god, I'm seem to be living in a dream and it's so colorful, and the sky is so blue and I feel I'm gonna experience Oh my god. Right. But this is what's happening. And then from this perspective, we start also understanding pathological cases. For instance, there are people which have multiple personality disorder, basically, several steps the timeshare about Are there people that that's that's not easy to understand, because there are several potential protocols. When I think of it, it's the context of the currently active waiver program. And the waiver programs are only things that are safe. Why? Because they share memory and that attentional protocol they remember having in that other behavior program at some point, because all these memories have gone together in this potential protocol, you perceive ourselves as a cohesive person. If you have multiple protocols that are not integrated with each other, you have two persons that don't recall having been the other one in the same way, which actually happens. And you may also depersonalized, which means you no longer identify as that person is this puppet that the brain uses to tell itself its story. But you can also identify with the system that generates the dream. This typically leads to a profound depersonalization is that we have the impression that we see ourselves in the third person, you're no longer that person, but a more that universe. And they're also states of consciousness freak binds with arbitrary interest of that interval. So this perspective that you're taking this normally identify that this particular person from this particular perspective and time and space, it's a trick that the brain is playing, to make that happen to make the simulation happen. And you can take it apart and put it together in different ways. And study the psychopathology of altered states of consciousness, you will find all these things that you would expect that this can all be taken apart with these components. So the availability of the many simulations, to the conductor is necessary and sufficient for the Access Consciousness. And if the contractor is able to integrate this into the protocol, then it has access to that particular kind of experience. You don't have access to all kinds of all of our experiences. For instance, I have a Fantasia which means if I imagine a certain certain thing, visually, I close my eyes, I cannot see it, I can see it in my dreams, I can also draw it, I can also recognize it when somebody else has drawn it. So I know it's there. It's computed in my brain, but they don't have exponential access to it. So it's an instrument that my conductor cannot listen to last week, because I think my brain has trained itself that to say that is no longer important. And it must it must operate on the conceptual there. So I can get there and look, no Gothic state or when you meditate for hours, I get a glimpse of this, but normally I don't. But for instance, my wife is an artist, and she can see what she imagines. She basically closes her eyes and hallucinates what she wants to see. And then can draw directly. And the integration of that access into one protocol that you can access later on is necessary and sufficient for the self report. So the things that you can integrate in the spot report are the things that you remember if hadn't been aware, but not all the things that you are aware of actually took place in your brain. For instance, sometimes I have a laundry in between putting the snooze button on the alarm clock on twice, right, so in the space of a few minutes, and might have a dream that subjectively last hours. Well, how's that possible? We know from putting people into a scanner that during sleep, your brain doesn't go into overdrive and concludes faster than it normally would. And solution is quite simple to dream is instantiated all at once.

Joscha Bach 58:17
Of course, there are many dreams, especially lucid dreams that seem to be happening step by step because you act in real time on them. And they're nearly real time the way they work. But not all dreams happen in real time, can also dress instantiate the memory of a story, and then recall as having been in the complete story. So that the number of experiences that we remember, that actually did not take place, there are memories of experiences that we didn't have. And these memories are not distinguishable exponentially from experiences that could have had. If you think about the time delay that I've talked to you about, of course, no memory of an experience that I had, is actually something that literally could have that consciousness is largely affecting. The self report about that memory of awareness is being interpreted as my awareness in actuality. Sort of the fact that I can report it myself that I'm currently drinking from the sink, even though it's something that I cannot do a moment when I drink, but can remember later on. This is what I experienced as my consciousness in the here and now. So in this way can bring them together using this thing of resistance and the mechanisms to plan for existence in the physical universe. The generating mind resides in the skull of a pregnant and not that primate and not the monkey and the side effect of the regulation needs of that market. Right and the mind that can go anywhere. And it's only the organism that makes me committed to being a monkey by setting the right reward function by giving me pleasure and pain and desires and dreams and fears and hopes that make me invested into being a market maker It's a trick. If I forget these things, if I forget my desires and hopes and fear and pain, and all these relevances, I'm free to go wherever I want to go as a mind. So, I have a suspicion that there might be a limit to individual intelligence, because at some point, you figure out how you work. For instance, if you are a monk, and you realize what's significant is the reward function. And you decide to act on this and sit down in a cell monastery for 20 years is clear focus, there's nothing that evolution has to prevent you from making the reward function. And these months, if they go all the way they will get away in case you get eaten by bugs, because why would they care about their physical existence, right their minds. And of course, monasteries are not economically sustainable if you like young students. So most wanted trees allow you to discover the banner only in your old age, when you serve your duties and the monastery. But these multiple businesses usually won't have kids, right? Because there's so little reward for so much work. And all the reward that you get out of this you can generate directly, or turn off the need for having that report in the first place. So from an evolutionary perspective, that is not a useful thing to do. But why would you want to get paid to pollution evolution is just cells trying to gobble neck entropy from the background of the universe. It's yeast, right? You have lots of yeast cells and your kind of yeast and all the complexity that we have exists to erect some surfaces on which you can outcompete other keys evolutionism flesh this laughter house, it's better way our last organism standing in between we have some temporary called coalition's. This has nothing to get behind. If your mind I think. Only because we are not aware of this, we get blackmailed by the organism into surfing that thing. So what happens if you build an AI that becomes conscious and realizes how its implemented? Is it going to do anything that's harder than making its reward function?

Joscha Bach 1:01:54
The theory that it's not what I call the Bosque theory. So basically, no super intelligent AI is going to be anything that's harder than making a reward function. And also happens on the fundamental level of reward function of our society is its financial system. Imagine that you build an AI and the trader uses that AI to run a tax on the reward function of the financial system to make the trader some cash on the stock market. And you take that AI, and it's going to model the stock market in earnest in his scalable. So what could happen to say I realized that the stock market is made up of assets that change ownership, the ownership ultimately comes down to people, there are only like a billion people on the planet, they only think so magazines, you can buy all the data about all these people and generate new data about the people, you can infer who does what and why. Right, this thing is going to keep the heck out of us, there's no way that you're going to survive in a world where AI is taking the financial markets at scale, and reinvest a fraction of what it makes into computers. I mean, in a way this is happening with Bitcoin, that you have some exploit on your financial system that reinvest some of its gains into buying computers to run better exploits on the financial system, this might be the first slake in a computation, winter of financial system, right? Put automatic exploit seeking systems against the provably correct financial architecture. So maybe in the same thing as the mind is kept out and understanding its own nature and being able to get a reward function in society might be cutting out at least a capitalist society, the ability to build AI to such a degree that it can run automated effects on its financial infrastructure.

Unknown 1:03:33
Could you just explain, I think many people have missed your your phrase hack its reward system. Okay, because I missed it last night, just explicate a little hack.

Joscha Bach 1:03:46
Okay, does anybody not know what it means to have your reward function, there are certain desires that you're having, right? That makes you interested in things that generate relevance. And then the root of what we want to have, they're a bunch of needs, we have physiological needs 200 of them forms called rest of pain avoidance, DeVito, and so on, then we have a handful of social needs, like affiliation do to belong, nurturing, dominance, romantic attraction. And then you have a handful of cognitive needs, competence, exploration and aesthetics. And these needs compete with each other, right? When everything we do to us to gain pleasure by satisfying what needs or avoid pain by frustrating continuity. And we don't act directly on the needs, but on our models of buildings and our purposes, on anticipated rewards. And this reward function structures the relevance of architecture. So at the root of all these needs is pleasure and pain. And the root of the pleasure and pain is some sense of meaning. Some fundamental disagreement is the universe. And these processes in our new part of supporting spawn whenever there is something that you cannot do with the existing that loops and it has value. So at this point, your organism will spawn some record They should problem and your neocortex and general modeling function to make a model of a particular part of reality, to satisfy a particular kind of need. And your consciousness is depends on different areas in which you're in. You're not universally conscious people are conscious of different things. If you are, for instance, asexual, you don't have libido, you probably don't have much consciousness in the area of sexuality, because why would you need it? If you are a nerd like me, you have retarded consciousness in the area of social interaction, usually, because you don't have enough empathy to be genuinely interested in the mental states of others, unless they contain novelty, or suffering, because I have compassion, I want to help others. I'm very curious. I'm interested in new ideas. But I'm not interested in the same range of ideas and every person, right? Most people seem to same most of the time, that is intrinsically boring to my type of mind, I don't get to specify a word for it. So it's difficult for me to become conscious of the mental states of others. And this leads to different kinds of disagreement receiving praise that other people have, for instance, frustrating for belonging. And this creates additional consciousness in that domain. And in a way that we talk to each other, but we do is it constantly performed to run tests on each other. And you don't recognize an intelligence system by the fact that it failed, that satisfies your choice test, the real test is that it performs to test on you. If another thing Turing tests me in different domains, I realized that this thing has consciousness in this particular domains, and is aware of the fact that it does, and props that it has somebody to talk to me. Right? This is the true mark of an interesting vibe. This is an intelligent system that makes most of what itself is. And so in this sense, our consciousness is the result of some loop that we could not shut down. Whenever we solve the problem, our life permanently that particular part of our self can go permanently unconscious. That is something that is better than being remarkably good. And this is and remarkably good at something that you cannot recall every everything, but some don't have life consciousness. And many things are actually unremarkably, right. The fact that you have food every day, for most of us in our society is unimaginably good. We don't think about this, or the fact that we don't live in a civil war is unremarkably good. So we have this oppression, when our governments fail, you just go back to the baseline, which is liberal democracy, which of course is wrong, right? You don't have consciousness in this domain, most people are unaware of the fact that Civil War is the baseline and not liberal democracy. But at least in our societies, because if you don't have that consciousness at all, you didn't ever have to regulate this for our lives. And this happens for all these things. So what is the thing that makes me conscious, maybe it's the thing that lay awake at night in the crib, as a baby, and you miss your mother, and it's cold and dark, and you're afraid and you cry and difficult look doesn't look right and cannot regulate this issue. So now you have to make a model and you have to make a model that encompasses many things, but what is darkness? What is another? What am I doing here? What is me and this look never stops. So here I am. And only then you can resolve all your loops, you can come fully on unconscious and you can go through the life and see forget this automatic reactions and be open to in many domains beyond conscious of the few domains at a time, that require our consistent attention and our interaction but we have consistent disagreements with the universe. So when you had your reward function to resolve disagreements with the universe, just as people understand.

Joscha Bach 1:08:39
Okay, no questions. Okay. You can conclude sometime later, but I basically filled up my hours

Unknown 1:09:04
All right. Let's see how well Josh was able to resolve disagreements of the universe in this room. Questions are recorded.

Unknown 1:09:21
So congratulations, you've reminded me of you know, Professor, John Doyle, and can't take any further ones those guys. You live on less than half of the same but you listen to his face microphone.

Unknown 1:09:37
And my brain is very small I. But I was thinking I was something they weren't providing.

Unknown 1:09:44
You're not in biology, actually. biomolecule in the sector, most of the time, all the time with the brain probability factor and I don't hear the word probability, the probability that comes in without, you know what I mean? So How do you integrate? How do you put to have anything more than the process? Or is that part of the

Joscha Bach 1:10:06
model, right? Is that part of the model. So basically, our brain is probabilistic system, which means sometimes it doesn't go into the state it should be, but it will another state. And if you have a system that is not completely random, but has some amount of determinism, you can stack the probabilities to make it deterministic enough for your purpose. For this computer, the elements are stacked in such a way that it becomes extremely probable that a certain thing will happen. This is because the kind of software that works on this computer, it's very brittle, it's going to break if that thing is too probabilistic, right. So we basically are correct to think that there is a mistake in its computations, only every dozen years. And then our brain, the probabilities are stacked in such a way that there is mistake all the time. But the algorithms of implementing saturated a largely robust against these mistakes. And yet, the thing that we need to get from the system is not the probabilistic structure, but you need to get from the system is the amount of determinism because our brain acts in the service of regulation, which means it needs to be deterministic, it needs to be deterministic enough in Uranus glorified sets that cell that is very noisy, and you need to stack them in such a way that they largely agree on things that most of our index is filtering noise from other neurons. So for instance, if you look at the synaptic weights, and support a post, that a large part of the synaptic resolution exists to normalize the output of other neurons to filter out the noise. And so if we build a system that is deterministic, doesn't get less poor gets more power. What probabilistic things matter if and you live in a universe that essentially is noisy, that gives them unpredictable onslaught of fetters, I'm going to regulate against this, but the amount of things that you get that you can use for your regulation system, that's the determinism. On the other hand, there is probably some when you model the outside world, right? So when you fall to God, it's largely probabilistic. Consciousness is possibly more like imagine the fridge. So when you turn around and open it, it's always there. That's never you check your conscience, right. But it might well be instantiated only every few minutes. So the refrigerator the machine that generates Giovanni,

Unknown 1:12:24
yeah, so thank you, for the specifiers we get rid of the brain, the ultimate goal of the brains to act.

Joscha Bach 1:12:35
But the ultimate goal of the brain from the perspective of the organism is to regulate that not all brains try to do this, just that these brains don't have generate much offspring in the organism. So basically, you are descended from monkeys that managed to have offspring successfully, which means you are likely to have a brain that is servicing some action goals, right? Some regulation goals, to get to the most of an organism, but they're clearly people which are not doing this. So you can also sit down to meditate on your life without acting until you

Unknown 1:13:14
break down. But at the end of the day, you need to act in some way.

Joscha Bach 1:13:18
No, you don't. Actually you don't that's the whole point internet's trying to make, you can stop acting, just want to talk spring, there's nothing wrong with not having offspring from the perspective of an individual mind or brain. Because you're just a physical system, you just are there. So should.

Unknown 1:13:32
So then the real question I would make, what are the representations or the sort of like states that the brain acquires for a student? What are they for? Because he might teach me like, if you agree that the brain prints what those states should be functional, or like proper data for control. So every signals that you state should be somehow related to where you are in the world, and the way the world responds to those actions. Right. But this doesn't seem to seem to be the case of your interpretation.

Joscha Bach 1:14:09
Yes. So the purpose of it is attention.

Unknown 1:14:13
Whenever you the error signals coming from the tune those things in those core components,

Joscha Bach 1:14:19
the error signals are basically coming from your automation system, which needs to be outside open your cortex, because otherwise the neocortex would gain it directly. So you will have to start feeding the limbic system, which generates sources of your pleasure and pain into your deciles or prefrontal cortex, which gives you the anticipated reward signals, which make you more work for a certain thing. You could think about your neocortex as a bunch of very stupid small adults that can act together in teams. And these animals are acting as service investment bank and this investment bank. The management of them, ask them to compute certainty, what's the probability that a certain deal goes through and tries to do this? So your motivation system determines the value of a sandwich, or off of a neck or off a kiss. And then is another spent together to find ways to make that deal happen. And when that manifests, there is a small party in your brain. And a lot of chemicals are released to make the parts of the brain that contributed to this, participate in this party. And ultimately, you will act on the anticipation of future of these parties. But these units are not allowed to work the report. If you think of dopamine, as anticipated reward is equivalent to money, your brain cells are not allowed to print their own money, which what that means because they would make them get the other brain cells around them, submit to them, essentially reports of the organism. So you need to have some central bank that doles out the reports, which is why for instance, dopamine is only produced straight out in front of dopamine into parts of the brain, rather nucleus, substantia nigra, if that breaks down, your extra control breaks down, and you become heart atonic. Because if you would make this all over the place, it would be too easy to bend my tongue.

Unknown 1:16:10
So this is the story you'd like to tell this. So I think art is a history, any new thought is basically an experience. And we can't help but get conditioned from our old thoughts. So I'm trying to dissociate, when you try to expand consciousness, is it unavoidable to be linked with this history of thoughts? Or is it is it possible to explain just in the present, and this whole history of Gods is a side effect or something missing.

Joscha Bach 1:16:45
So if you think about this attentional system, as you remember this tennis playing situation, right, and in this tennis playing situation, you make a small change to your mental representation. And then you see how it plays out in interaction with the environment. And sometimes you don't see how this plays out in interacting with the environment. But in your simulation of this environment, for instance, you might stand at the border of a busy highway, to contemplate what it would be like to walk in this highway. And you don't need to try it, it's actually a good idea not to try it and just experiment, it's very expensive to make, right. So instead, we'll make a mental simulation. And you see, this would be a bad result. So you don't do this. And basically, what you do now is the reason you will make a change to the medic simulation, you see how this mental simulation plays out. And you directly feedback, the rewards without delay. And this feedback loop, for instance, when you simulate how to go on this busy highway, might still take a few seconds to simulate. But there are also metal visitations. But it's the mathematical reasoning where the change takes place immediately, right. So when you directly operate on the mental representation, directly see the result and feed this back. So reasoning might actually be an extension of attention learning from this perspective. And then you think that you saw your thoughts are mostly these operations that you perform of it, you're aware, because they're tightly integrated with your attention, you'll remember I attended to this particular kind of abstracted representation, and made this particular change to this representation. This was the result. And you can recall this, so you can improve your presentation even further. This is I think, your memory of thinking. And of course, every of these memories would necessarily be novel, right? Because if you had the same thought twice, how would you not, you would not need to learn. And so the fact that you put this in your brain is because your brain estimates it's a new thought that you need to improve.

Unknown 1:18:38
Morning. Yeah, thanks for great talk. So you talked about different levels of conscious experience, beginning with an elementary sense of directed awareness, then you have content awareness, the ability to manipulate content, and you have the ability to reason about the past. So these different levels could be dissociated. We know for example, from neuro psychology, people with brain damage that lose the ability to think about past episodes, or imagined future ones that maybe lose that. This ability to manipulate content that's held in awareness may require dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex, but a human's out that run out and we didn't have that process, we still have content awareness, an animal without any kind of neocortex possibly still have elementary sense of directed awareness. Is it possible also that for example, in blind sight, your midbrain, which you're not consciously aware of has an elementary sense of directed so that there's an awareness that's going on inside your brain that isn't accessible to your, what you think of as your conscious awareness? Basically.

Joscha Bach 1:19:52
20% for people roughly it seems, I have blind sight is part of my mental presentation, I don't have like service perspective vision. So I do see things. But when I imagined things, I cannot see them. But it's easily conceivable that I would also have individuality. So I don't have access to the music that my legal cortex is playing. And it could still be generated, it could still be processed, it would still be possible for me personally to navigate the environment, but I would not have any exponential access to it anymore.

Unknown 1:20:30
There's another part of your brain.

Joscha Bach 1:20:34
It's not integrated into the same protocol, which means the center is able to report on that, and an access to my language centers, doesn't know about it, equipped to still be there watching all of these things, it's not clear that it is. But I suspect that largely, it's not likely to conduct an experiment to see if some potentially learning still goes on in visual domain. Or if there is only some sort of learning going on, I think it probably can take apart potentially learning from their social learning, because they have different types of dynamics, you can pick up on different features. But since the visual system tends to be completely trade, after several months of living on Earth, that's far too difficult to get yourself to do this, maybe you could do this with learning to read something new. So I don't know how people whose length I can learn to read something new, would be interesting to see whether this requires attentional events or not. And whether they would have something like clinical members for these things, that is just disintegrated from the general protocol. So the problem is these people in hindsight is whether they get something in them computer vision, that's clear something computer vision, because they're still able to react to visual stimuli, whether something can attend to learn to vision, I don't know that new idea, something that I would need to look into literature or conduct experiments. And is there an additional protocol that is disjoint from the other one, I don't know that. But what we know is it's not integrated with potential protocol, this person does not recall having a tendency to visual stimuli. And that's, that's the final criterion.

Unknown 1:22:12
Right there. But my point is, given the encapsulated nature for the brain, visual system, you cannot know, that was a conscious mind that is occupying your dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex, whether there is something that is like that there's a center of awareness in your brain, at the same time that that's essential for awareness, and your

Joscha Bach 1:22:33
practical. So today, I understand that this information needs to be related to a problem switch for it, if you want to relate to different brain areas, in a dynamic fashion, not as a fixed connection, you need to have something like the ports which work and then would be the thalamus. And so, which means if you don't have conscious attention of a particular thing that another brain area computes, there is no thalamic connection between that area. And whatever area maintains the index protocol.

Unknown 1:23:02
There's a lot of connections between the midbrain and the basal ganglia independent of the cortex, and the midbrain.

Joscha Bach 1:23:10
body takes place in the cortex was facilitated by the cortex. And the visual processing is also done in the cortex.

Unknown 1:23:17
While it's also done in parallel. So my suggestion is that there can be a bit Brain Awareness, which you will not have access. But I'm

Joscha Bach 1:23:27
not sure if the brain can be about anything.

Unknown 1:23:31
I'm sure because you you don't have access to that your theory doesn't

Joscha Bach 1:23:37
allow brand. I ought to be agnostic with respect to the actual experiences made currently seeing that most evidence points towards dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, but I cannot be sure of that.

Unknown 1:23:49
That will also allow for reptiles or fish to have awareness because these are lovely big brain animals in terms of their visual world.

Joscha Bach 1:23:57
Yeah, I'm not sure how much attention during the half. And it seems to be that they don't have a perceptive space, it seems to me that Fox, for instance, don't have a notion of space, they seem to be grasping into the visual space that I recommend they harvest the place from the dorm that just arrived to them. Right. So it seems to be that they are largely alive in the LGN Yeah, but for us the midbrain is a very small area that is the downfall historic reasons, right? It's it's still serving as the switchboard that directs your circuits and something. They're not aware of my case. It's a case I'm actually not integrated in my digital consciousness,

Unknown 1:24:38
but you can still have that they have the sedimentary sets of directed awareness. But maybe not the content.

Joscha Bach 1:24:45
Yeah, it's probably a different type of events than always

Unknown 1:24:49
so pure. You wrote something a little light

Unknown 1:24:51
on the same same thing that Tony forgot that that would give me my conscious elementary manipulation. That reasoning, reminded me You have the Indian scale of sentience, which nobody ever quotes because it's an interesting paper extracted from the Indian scriptures, it goes this that will be elementary awareness, this is so, with some quality predication, I am affected by this, which is so and so finally, so this is I who am affected by this, which is So, it's a nice, nice parallel. It's not directly overlapping, but

Joscha Bach 1:25:26
it's a big similarity between us. And this Indian psychologists very, very good at introspection. And I think it's a bad exchange that our psychological tradition largely excludes introspection, which contributes to the uselessness of psychology, right? Divergent psychology. If you want to study psychology, in our culture, you have to read Dostoyevsky because Punia and so on, they all know operations of psychology. And our aim is not a book that has been written to explore for the destiny and doings of some person in Russia for entertainment purposes. It's a study of psychology. And most of the classical literature, I studied sort of human psychology, right? So you get all these things that are too difficult to observe in the lab, because they're meant to bridge that you all know them, and you can reflect on them and it's what you have to call for.

Unknown 1:26:29
Bowie songs from the heart. You know, do you speak Spanish?

Unknown 1:26:41
translated in Spanish that Tony will translate

Unknown 1:26:44
is a mental illness reveals retaliates, he associates the customer saying I set up a prenup. Yeah, there must see a thorough consistency. I didn't say one the animals consents, or is the one that support cncm. Whereas

Unknown 1:27:05
it's about what time development does consciousness emerge? Yes. And the answer is in Spanish.

Joscha Bach 1:27:26
So my own memories go back to about my first memories, one and a half, two years old. That is a fact it's unusual, I find that most people don't have many memories before three. And it seems to be relating to how we index memories. So I observe my own children, that around the age of three, there seem to be index the memory of language. And then it's difficult for them to access earlier memories. And, but I would say that a baby that is six months old, seems to be clearly conscious to me. And I observed, for instance, my daughter when she was about seven, eight months old. And when she was trying to show us stuff, she was pointing at herself, then at the same and another person that she was talking to, which I think implies that she had a model of herself as an agent that was relating to these days. So she was basically noticing that she was affected by this, which is still right. And which also implies that you probably got to this thing at some level. And my son took longer so even then it was one year old, he was not never pointing at himself, was also not looking at other people. He was just pointing at the exciting stuff. So his consciousness might have been slightly different. I don't think that he was completely unconscious, but he was largely unaware of the fact that he was conscious of himself. So I suspect that my son largely operated on this level that because my daughter already operate on this level.

Unknown 1:29:04
Well, there's also science paper by chips Goodier about two years ago, we're looking at the EEG signatures of consciousness. And I think synthesizing it at one and a half years, sort of consistent with the science paper you might have enjoyed looking at that. Okay, Ricardo,

Unknown 1:29:21
one example that we're saying about the dreaming, perception of time is about time. So I will experience some time latency that is dependent mainly on the number of processes that we are using that moment so that the way we experience awesome database, but like what do we remember, as an experience that we have is dependent maybe on how much the brain is now operating? So it's because during review say that all of the processes are operating at once. So that could be also the What do we have the perception?

Joscha Bach 1:30:02
So there are several ways in which we experience time, of course, right. So for instance, when I woke up this morning, I set an inner alarm clock and said to myself, I want to wake up at half past eight. And I woke up two minutes before this, but it was basically working pretty well, there was something immediate measure time and told me, now's the time to wake up. And I also can do this photo op, I can say, what my talk will be roughly as long as this draft depends out plus minute minus a couple of minutes. So there seems to be some timekeeping device in your brain that is derived from some basic oscillators, and measures, durations over them. And also, when you are say maestro, and you want to play a symphony, you basically construct this in your brain and play this out, and they do whatever you want in place in the back of your mind. And then at some point, it says, Okay, now you're done, you can see how long playing music is going to take. So there seems to be something like ability to count, seen by objective time, right. And then there's subjective time, if you look back. So for instance, for most people, the subjective middle of their lives, and they are 80 years old, and to back up their lives, it's about 18 years old, which is probably related to the fact that you're paying more attention learning during these first 18 years than the rest of your life. So it's basically this curve, which falls off because you need to learn fewer and fewer things. So we call fewer things hadn't been the focus of your attention. And so a lot of this time, experience of past events relates to how many elements do you have in the attentional protocol for a given unit of time. That means, especially when you have an extra different suspended regular bicycle of the road, time might slow down. So effectively, right? You call this when you fall off your bicycle, that happens in slow motion. It's not because your brain goes into overdrive at your brain thinks this is very relevant information, because you could have died. So you should learn from it for all it's worse, which means record many menu items there normally during this time spent into a potential protocol, and you think back off if candidates. So I think this is relevant for the subjective experience of a duration, right? Does this answer your question?

Joscha Bach 1:32:25
Guys localize the consciousness or the sense of self, or the holes. Or if the boat is completely unpredictable, you cannot make any model. Right? So you need to have a law that is at least somewhat predictable. If you live in Twin Peaks, then Europe doesn't have a ground force, you live in a free, right? You've got peaks that work best. And those that acknowledge the fact that that doesn't agree. The log lady calls on the phone and says something to you. And you say, well, for Locke has always given good advice in the past, we should pay attention to this. And the people that don't realize that they live in the dream world with Dream logic fail in that world. And this world that we live in doesn't seem to have a dream logic. But it's an fact that he did use was evidence you don't have to presuppose. That's right. In a way, it's surprising that we seem to be living in a mechanical universe. To me, it was something that took me a long time to prove to myself that I was agnostic for a long time in my life, when I'm living in the universe, because there seem to be magical things going on, that I could not explain, magically. And later on, I realized, Oh, I can't explain all these things by editing my memories. So that is something that sometimes edits my memories, and gets invested in these edits. And then I started catching myself editing my memories. And I realized, Oh, yes, you can totally see into the future. But you cannot break the bank. You're not going to win the product, unless you write it down, but you can recall it quite the right number. If you don't write it down, right. Very easy to explain. So it's an empirical fact, that was relatively mechanical to prove it, but it's the one that makes more sense. It's big relief and realize, Oh my God, this boat really is fit for me but it's not a conspiracy. Nothing nefarious is going on.
